# Sins

## Introduction
Is the twenty-first century really a time when we can talk about sin? Is the idea still relevant in a world in which we perceive morality as relative, deity as inexplicable or non-existent, science and technology as the new gods, and good and evil as outmoded ideas that are too simplistic for a reflective, modern (or even post-modern) individual? Is sin necessarily something that reflects a religious world-view, or might it be a fundamental psychological dynamic that has profound meaning in terms of our compulsions, our struggles with our own tendencies toward destructiveness, and our efforts to contribute something creative to life? The concept of the Seven Cardinal Sins is a very ancient one, and long predates what we now think of in Western cultures as a medieval and grossly outdated list of offences against the dictates of religious orthodoxy. The word 'sin', in English, comes from the Old English word 'synn', which carries many meanings: moral wrongdoing, injury, mischief, enmity, feud, guilt, crime, and offences against God. The German word 'Sünde', which found its way into Old English, likewise means a transgression, a trespass, or an offence. Behind both of these lies the Latin word 'sons', which means a guilty person, or a criminal. Yet the earliest roots of the idea concern the journey of the soul from its heavenly origin to its life in earthly form, and the various ways in which humans transgress by opposing, abusing, or misinterpreting the will of the gods. If we are to understand within a psychological framework what it might mean to sin, and what kind of profoundly complex and potentially transformative themes underpin older and often highly misleading interpretations, we will need to look more deeply at each of the Cardinal Sins and its expressions in individual character and life. The challenges of the Seven Sins don’t disappear with age, nor lessen with experience. Like Shakespeare's Cleopatra, custom doesn’t stale the infinite variety of the Sins. Although they may appear in youth in forms that outwardly don’t resemble the forms of later life, they are in essence the same. For example, a compulsive greed for success in a young person might wear the face of personal worldly achievement, while in an older person the same compulsive greed may appear as a need to push one’s children or grandchildren, whether they wish it or not, toward one’s own unfulfilled dreams of success. Although some of the descriptions that follow may seem to belong to earlier or later times in your life rather than to the present, the essential nature of each Sin doesn’t alter. What can change at any time in life, with effort and inner exploration, is our consciousness, and our capacity to recognise the subtle ways in which our inner compulsions can impel us to express the very best as well as the very worst within us.

## The First Sin: Envy
The first Cardinal Sin is Envy. In Latin they called it 'Invidia'. But the psychological understanding of Envy is very complex, and perhaps 'sin' is not an appropriate term for this most important, challenging, and potentially immensely grounding aspect of human behaviour. Envy is not as simple as just wishing you had something someone else has, or wishing for qualities you see in another person but feel that you yourself lack. Envy has to do with your capacity to accept certain limitations on the ways in which you build the foundations of your self-confidence; if you can work with those limitations rather than ignoring them, then Envy can provide the bricks and mortar that help you to feel you have firm ground to stand on throughout life. Envy is also a key factor in those areas where you feel insecure and unsure of yourself, and here too, if you are prepared to acknowledge and work with those insecurities rather than avoiding them, you can develop a quality of realism that will ground your aspirations and help to make them possible and real. The key to dealing with Envy is self-honesty and self-acceptance. Envy, in the sense that it remains an unconscious aspect of human emotion, might be better described as Self-doubt, because it involves the perception that others have more or are better than oneself. And perhaps a better word for Envy, when it is understood and worked with, might be Authenticity.

### Learning to live in the moment
Dealing with Envy in a creative way requires calm realism and an acceptance of the world of human failings, imperfections, and fears. And that does not come easily to you. Your dreams of life take you beyond ordinary limits and the pressures, responsibilities, and routines of everyday tasks, and your aspirations are likely to be focused on the future and on the fruits of your creative imagination rather than on living each moment with an appreciation of ordinary things. But although you may be critical, or even contemptuous, of those who seem, in your eyes, to be bound to the wheel of mundane life and don't aspire to anything higher, bigger, more exciting, or more meaningful, it is these apparently 'ordinary' people (and there is, of course, no such animal) who are most likely to trigger a deep and painful Envy in you.

### The pitfalls of flying too high
Your freedom-loving nature tends to lift you as far away as possible from the darker dimensions of human emotion. When things become too murky, you move on to what you perceive as 'important' ideas, projects, and plans for the future. When relationships become too sticky, you start dreaming of a partner who will not try to fence you in or demand too many overt demonstrations of love. But the contempt you may feel toward those who seem to be stuck in the everyday treadmill of life might reveal that you are not immune to feelings of Envy, especially of people who can commit themselves to their loved ones, their work, and the responsibilities of everyday life. Commitment can be a disturbing issue for you, and it is here that your deepest Envy may lie; for only a profound commitment to life, even if it brings pain, can generate the kind of authenticity and solidity that you forever seek but somehow never seem to find.

### Never build a house on a volcano
You have an intense emotional nature and feel things with great depth and passion - not only in your personal relationships, but also in the realm of ideas, beliefs, and goals. But your pride, sensitivity, and lack of trust in others makes you wary of displaying your feelings. You expect rejection, and fear the humiliation and betrayal that vulnerability can expose you to. When you see people who follow their passions with trust and joyful abandon, and who seem to be enriched rather than destroyed by even the most painful experiences, you are likely to feel deep Envy of their resilience and confidence. When you do indulge in the pursuit of a grand passion, you are likely to do it in a restrained, secretive, and even manipulative way. Even the people you love most may not realise just how intense your feelings are. You may seek to control those you care most deeply about, but this will only make you even more mistrustful. You long to belong to a group of like-minded souls, but you defend your vulnerability by trying to control the people you are involved with, or pretending that you don't want to be accepted by others at all. Neither is a very helpful way of dealing with Envy, which you are likely to feel toward those who seem to find their place in the community without struggling to earn it. You fear and long for the kind of courageous emotional commitment that forms the substance of so many great works of literature. When Tristan abandons all for his love of Isolde, or Romeo risks his life to claim his Juliet, they have entered a world in which one comes closer to feeling the breath of the gods than in any other domain of life. Something similar might be said about those who make an absolute commitment to creative work, or to a cause about which they feel passionate. It is in this world of crisis and transformation that your deepest Envy is likely to be aroused, by people who can indulge their passions without the anxiety you suffer. You need to find ways of communicating your feelings, rather than trying to control any situation where you might suffer ridicule or humiliation. The more you understand your own complexity, and the more honestly you can express yourself, the greater your Authenticity will be.

### Alone in a crowd
Interaction with your peers, colleagues, friends, and community is one of the most important themes in your life. You need the group, yet you have always been an outsider, aware of your differentness but wanting badly to be one of the crowd in the superficial way in which ordinary social acquaintances function. You want to share ideas, but you don't often find people you can easily talk to about the deeper issues that concern you. You can feel envious toward people who seem to effortlessly 'belong' and apparently suffer no sense of loneliness or exclusion, even when they behave in ways that you would never countenance. Whether or not any human being is able to escape feelings of loneliness is debatable, but in your eyes, almost everyone except you is readily accepted without the feelings of exclusion and inadequacy that you sometimes suffer. This deep insecurity in group situations can make you deeply suspicious of others' motives, and inclined to remember every apparent slight or rejection. You may contribute to your own isolation through touchiness and pride, and you may wind up deeply envious toward people who can express their feelings with trust and confidence. One of the toughest challenges you are likely to encounter is acceptance of the fact that you are a unique individual and can never be simply one of the crowd. While you might accept this idea on the conscious level, it will still always hurt. There will be times when you have to pursue your path alone, and accept being unacceptable to people who do not understand your values. That doesn't mean that you can't enjoy deep and enduring friendships, the supportive company of colleagues, and the sense of making a valuable contribution to a larger human community. Envy will always lie in wait if you sell your soul and betray your own values and abilities in order to be acceptable. The aspirations of the 'Spirit of the Time' are important to you, and you need to feel you are part of that larger movement toward progress. But your deep sense of separateness is a blessing, not a curse, because it allows you to be an authentic individual.

### Playing it safe
It has been said that it is better to fall in love with the conductor than with the second violin, and this proverb may well apply to you. Your fear of being hurt in relationship has made you a realist about what you can expect from love, even if you harbour a secret romanticism. You can make the necessary adjustments and compromises to sustain a long-term bond because stability is more attractive to you than turbulence. You can recognise how even people who love passionately can injure and exploit each other, and you are more likely to choose someone who can provide emotional or financial security. This may keep you safe, and brings its own form of deep contentment that increases over the years. But it can also open the door to Envy of those who have been willing to take the risk and leap into the unknown for a passion that inspires the soul, rather than one that ensures a secure but sometimes unromantic union. Fear of loneliness can make you seek a safe and stable relationship. You can be deeply empathetic and willing to make sacrifices for those you love. But you can also be empathetic to a lot of people, and although you are prepared to give up romantic dreams, it may be hard for you to live within the limits of a partnership that demands absolute commitment. Your capacity for commitment is a fine asset, and you may enjoy greater stability in your personal life than many people manage to achieve. You are unlikely to gamble everything on a Great Love that might burn itself out or prove to be illusory. Deep contentment can spring from this kind of realism. But pay attention if you become too critical of people who are living the life you are too frightened of living. It is not that you should try to be like them. But you may need to recognise that, in upholding the path you have chosen, you have also had to sacrifice other aspects of yourself that you might secretly envy in others. If your choice is made with open eyes, according to your deepest values, Envy will not become corrosive. But if your choice is based on fear, you may need to find the courage to acknowledge and accept your limitations and feel gratitude for what you have built, rather than trying to escape into deception and loss of your Authenticity.

### Even if you're paranoid, they may still be out to get you
You don't have much faith in human nature, and your experiences in life may seem to justify this mistrust. You are painfully aware of the dark side of the psyche, including your own, and you can be fiercely determined to go your own way rather than subject yourself to the will of the crowd, even on the level of mistrusting popular trends. Your insights are deep and acute, and you might do well in any field of work that requires an instinctive awareness of hidden danger, whether psychic or physical. You are a survivor who can withstand loneliness, but you cannot tolerate any feeling of being controlled or manipulated. These qualities are valuable and positive, because you know how to look after yourself and your loved ones with strength, tenacity, and courage. But you pay a high price for your insights, not least a sense of isolation, and you may feel deep Envy toward those who can identify with the group and feel comfortable in the company of others. You are suspicious of groups, institutions, and social networks, and you prefer to pursue your ideals alone. But you also long to be part of a larger unity and are eager to promulgate the ideas that matter to you. You can always spot people who are subtly working to take control, but be careful of initiating power battles and becoming the kind of person you are fighting against. The problem with seeing life as an eat-or-be-eaten arena is that you may find yourself behaving uncomfortably like those whom you fear, with a similar tendency to seek power, perhaps even ruthlessly, over the people you perceive as the problem. Envy can be especially painful because, deep down, you wish you could enjoy the comfort of simple trust in your fellow humans. You may defend yourself from distressing feelings of Envy by being highly critical of people who lack the kind of depth and insight you believe to be essential to survival. You will be able to express the most creative dimension of your instinctive knowledge of human nature by remaining as aware as possible of your ordinary human needs. If you are able to acknowledge the pain of loneliness and the Envy of more sociable temperaments, you will be better able to develop a balanced response to the complex mix of dark and light that belongs to human life.

### Art and magic
You are one of those gifted people capable of access to the realm of the imagination as well as the capacity to put your images and intuitions into concrete form. This is a special talent, and whatever your chosen medium, it is important that you develop the appropriate skills in order to communicate your rich inner world effectively. Ideally, this ability ought to protect you from Envy toward others, because you have a strong inner resource that can ensure a sense of meaning and connectedness to a deeper reality. But Envy can still trouble you, particularly if you have not made the effort to develop your talents and then see others with less ability who have worked successfully to make their dreams manifest. You might believe that the realm of the imagination is too threatening, or undervalue it as a poor second to success in the material world. Or you might prefer to spend your time in delightful daydreams. But if you try that route, the inner world is not likely to leave you alone, and will keep tapping on the door in the form of anxiety and irrational forebodings. Your strong desire to please others, and your tendency to put too much energy into adapting rather than remaining loyal to your own dreams, can make it hard for you to express your visions in concrete form. But sooner or later you will have to come to terms with the need for boundaries and the capacity to cope with the aloneness necessary for any creative work. Whatever reasons might lie behind your reluctance to make your gifts manifest in a way that is fulfilling, you can still be highly successful in the world's eyes and able to make an important contribution to others. The difficulty lies in just whose contribution it really is. Your desire to remain in control of things may ensure that what you do suits the wishes of others, but you may be afraid to risk creative work that nourishes the demands of your own soul. Take time to listen to your own heart and discern whether you are loyal enough to your inner vision. The price you may pay for inner disloyalty is Envy, which will creep in when you encounter people who are willing to give their hearts and souls to what they believe to be an inner truth, without compromise and without the expectation of worldly status and approval. Although others might not be able to spot the difference, you always can. Envy may lie not in any obvious jealousy of another's talents or success, but in a nagging inner sense that you are not living the authentic life your inner self demands.

### Envy and individuation
Unacknowledged Envy can distort your vision. Other people can appear to be so much better endowed, luckier, or more gifted than you are, and that injures you. Or they become the objects of your criticism and contempt, and that injures them. Envy can be an intractable destroyer, which is why it was viewed as the greatest of the Sins. Much of the world's misery and destructiveness is rooted in unconscious Envy, not only of individuals but also of national and racial groups. The creative side of Envy, when it is conscious, is that it can make you work much harder to develop the qualities you believe you lack in your own individual way. You can achieve profound insights into your deepest values, as well as the skills and knowledge to express them. But first you have to find out what these qualities are, and recognise that you will always remain who you are, and can develop your potential only within the limits of your unique personality. This means, in short, that you need to be able to accept and appreciate who you are, rather than hoping to become like somebody else. Ultimately human beings can never become anything other than the fullest and best expression of their own essential individual core. Most importantly, try to recognise that feelings of distaste toward those who appear to be boringly normal may mask a deep Envy of their capacity for appreciating the ordinary in life. Your love of freedom and your dislike of feeling trapped by the mundane world reflect not only a mobile intellect and imagination, but also a fear that you might not be able to cope with the everyday responsibilities and tasks that less enlightened people seem to manage with ease. Try to find greater self-honesty, and allow yourself to recognise how much you sometimes need to rest in the embrace of the everyday before you pursue the next journey. Dealing with Envy doesn't mean trying to compensate for what you believe you lack by becoming just like someone else, or acquiring what they have. Envy breeds in the darkness when you carry a distorted vision of yourself and judge yourself wanting. Transforming Envy into Authenticity requires the painful recognition of what you secretly wish you had, an equally painful recognition that you will never have it in precisely the form you admire it in others, and the dawning realisation that you can develop it in your own unique way, through hard work, effort, commitment, and appreciation of your own gifts. The psychoanalyst Melanie Klein wrote that Envy could be healed through Gratitude. Klein's idea of Gratitude is the experience of feeling fulfilled by what you are able to do reasonably well, whatever that might be. And it also involves appreciation of the gifts of others, because these gifts brighten all our lives. Gratitude doesn't demand perfection or genius, and it emerges with the realisation that everyone, whatever their limitations, has some area of life where they can shine and feel a self-respect that comes from within. If you can feel contented rather than resentful that you are who you are, Envy can transform into a genuine and indestructible sense of Authenticity.

## The Second Sin: Gluttony
The second Cardinal Sin is Gluttony. In Latin, it was known as 'Gula', a word that also means 'throat' - an allusion to a boundless greed for food and drink. Like Envy, Gluttony can be destructive, from its effects on physical health to its effects on the planet through overconsumption and waste. Also like Envy, Gluttony is an archetypal human expression that needs more careful examination. We usually think of Gluttony in terms of food. Films are full of images of individuals with ravenous appetites devouring delicacies in such gross fashion that one feels like throwing up one's own lunch. One has only to think of 'Monty Python's Meaning of Life', in which a man eats so much that he bursts. This might seem comic rather than sinful. But as a culture, we have, perhaps justifiably, been accused of rampant and wasteful consumerism. And ultimately the destructive impact of Gluttony can result in irreversible damage to the planet itself. But Gluttony isn't only about a shameless appetite for more food, money, or possessions. The great medieval philosopher Thomas Aquinas wrote: 'Gluttony denotes, not any desire of eating and drinking, but an inordinate desire ... leaving the order of reason, wherein the good of moral virtue consists.' Aquinas thought Gluttony sprang from a failure of moral conviction, reflected in an unwillingness to relinquish 'inordinate' desire. Perhaps another way of understanding Gluttony is that it reflects a compulsive need to be more than what we are. When we fail to understand that need, it may translate itself into a symbol: more food, a bigger car, a larger house, more expensive clothes, more lovers, more fame or popularity, greater knowledge or power. We might also call Gluttony Dissatisfaction, because it reflects something within us that remains perennially discontented with mundane reality, and strives for something that will satisfy a subtler, more inward kind of appetite. If we can maintain moral integrity in the face of that dissatisfaction, we might discover a powerfully creative drive that we could also call Aspiration.

### Falling from a great height
The idea that you too might experience Gluttony could be offensive, because you are a vital and energetic person who needs to feel that the world is full of distant horizons that can be explored with freedom and creative vision. The compulsive qualities of Gluttony can be frightening to such a free spirit, and any cravings you experience may be rationalised or simply dismissed as unimportant. Whatever form your Gluttony takes - simple greed for food, money, beautiful objects, or sensual pleasure, or a more complex expression such as greed for power or status in the world - try to pay attention to those spheres where you are not free at all, but are bound to the earth by compulsions that insist on being met regardless of your focus on the future and on the next creative project waiting just around the corner. Gluttony is the secret face of a deeper aspiration toward acknowledging your physical existence in a physical world, and you may not be entirely honest about the importance of what you perceive as the banal aspirations of those less imaginative than you.

### Over the hills and far away
Your restless nature makes it likely that Gluttony, as a disguised form of Aspiration, may dominate your inner life without your even realising it. You are capable of handling mundane responsibilities if you can see the point of them, but you dislike being trapped or limited by the constrictions of material life and the emotional demands of others. You may be compulsively hungry for pursuits that help you to escape the present and enter those realms of thought and imagination that open the doors to future possibilities. This could become a kind of addiction through which you can find solace when you begin to feel that worldly pressures are becoming too great. The craving for escape can be as much an aspect of Gluttony as the craving for food, drink, or drugs, but you might not recognise it for what it is.

### When you wish upon a star
You have a fine intuition and an ability to make connections which more prosaic minds might miss. But you also have a form of Gluttony that can generate an absolute belief in the Rightness and Truth of your intuitions. This kind of addiction craves the sense of a special telephone line to the divine, allowing you to feel favoured and exempt from the banality and pointlessness that you may believe others waste their lives wallowing in. You have the gift of intuitive faith, which can see you through many obstacles without ever losing your conviction that life is fundamentally benign and purposeful. But be careful of the kind of self-righteousness that so often accompanies deep faith, whether that faith is experienced within a religious system, a philosophy, or a political or scientific ideology. It might be wise for you to remember that no human being can see it all, and however 'true' your insights might be, you will always miss something that another person can perceive more easily. Full-blown Gluttony of this kind can lead to a smug self-satisfaction that will not ultimately serve your deeper Aspiration toward a sense of connectedness with the meaningful patterns in life. Your craving for meaning is supported by an intuitive faith in a deeper or higher source, and this trust can see you through many dark times. Make sure you can express your revelations through the right creative medium, rather than simply immersing yourself in a sea of visions and connections that serves as an escape from the limits of ordinary everyday life. Meaning is deeply important to you and you are addicted to the quest for it, whether it is through science, art, education, social or political movements, or religious or spiritual concerns. As long as you can recognise the limitations of your human perceptions, and can acknowledge that truths are found in many shapes and guises, you will retain sufficient humility and humour to explore the higher realms without discovering that you have inadvertently become filled with arrogance and intolerance instead of inspiration and enlightenment. If personal insecurities compel you to feel more important or special than others, especially in the eyes of whatever deity or ideology you invest with your hopes, you will be in the grip of a form of Gluttony that could take you further away from, not closer to, the truth and meaning you seek so passionately. Make sure you can laugh at yourself and at the absurdity of life, and you can transform Gluttony into an enduring Aspiration that will nourish your mind and spirit throughout your life.

### Merging with the One
The world of the imagination is your natural home, and it is also the source of your Gluttony. You have an intuitive sense of realities beyond the domain of mundane life, and you crave solace and inspiration from a deeper or higher source that links you with earlier generations, earlier times, the realm of symbols and images, and the collective psyche from which all forms of art arise. This sense of connection, which might be described as a longing to lose yourself in the One, probably existed in your family background for many generations. But you need to find your own language to express your perceptions of the inner world. And you also need a sense of connection with the mundane world in order to keep your balance. Otherwise, if your craving to merge with that Other becomes full-blown Gluttony, you may run the risk of seeking escape from life through substances such as drugs or alcohol, or a repressive collective formula for worship that seems to provide comfort but effaces any individual creative expression of your inner vision. Your intuition can work overtime when it comes to your craving for experiences of a spiritual or revelatory kind. Be careful of becoming too addicted to the meaningful clues that you believe a purposeful universe is strewing across your path, for this kind of compulsion can inflate your sense of self-importance and interfere with your connection to the realities of everyday life. You are a glutton for the world of the spirit and the imagination. Your compulsive reliance on inner realities can expand your mind, heart, and spirit, but it can also provide a defence against the challenges of ordinary mundane life and your deep anxiety that you will not be able to cope. Make sure that you don't devalue everyday obligations such as financial matters and physical health because you feel your spiritual life is too important and your convictions too profound to waste your time on things that do not fulfil your inner vision. The deeper Aspiration behind your craving is not escape from the everyday world, or exemption from its responsibilities. Transforming Gluttony into Aspiration requires you to act with humility as a mouthpiece for ideas and visions that belong to everyone but which need to be communicated through your unique individual abilities. If you can embrace your ordinary humanness, you will find the balance necessary to nourish your inner and your outer worlds.

### The good, the beautiful, and the empty bank account
In your world, more is always better, and Gluttony is likely to express itself as overindulgence, overspending, and resentment about any limits that require you to restrain your cravings. If you are fortunate, you may acquire enough to support this kind of Gluttony without serious financial pressure. If you are less fortunate, you may try to live beyond your means and find yourself in a mess. Either way, you can treat your body with the same indulgence that you display toward material matters, and sooner or later this can take its toll on your health. You are a generous person, and you try to share the good things in life with friends and loved ones. There is nothing mean or nasty about your form of Gluttony. But you may waste far too much time, energy, resources, and talents in the pursuit of a dream. And you may slip into the childlike belief that some kind of divine or human intervention will always come to the rescue if you get into trouble. You tend to indulge yourself in the experience of losing yourself in others. You have imagination and empathy, but you are frightened of loneliness, and you crave a romantic vision of merging with loved ones that can make them feel overwhelmed. You can be excessive in your pursuit of the unobtainable, but no human can provide you with the state of total oneness that you seek. Your appreciation of life as a beautiful place is a gift that can bring you great joy, and you are able to pass that joy on to others. Your deeper Aspiration reflects a conviction that this world is here to be valued and enjoyed. You are driven, not by meaningless materialism, but by a craving to make manifest a sense of something beneficent at work in the whole of life. But you need to honour the value and purpose of limits. Your Gluttony carries with it a belief that you are a specially favoured Divine Child who is automatically entitled to the good life. This might seem innocent, but unless you actually are a child, it can also be destructive, since you may assume that other people are on this earth to pay your bills or help you out of any mess you make. Without built-in limits, Nature would destroy itself through its own excessive proliferation. And like all other living things, you too are a part of Nature.

### The magic telephone
Your hunger for sudden inspirations, revelations of new possibilities, or sudden 'messages' that seem to come from some higher or deeper source is really a kind of Gluttony. You are willing to take chances that others might back off from, and may assume that you will always land on your feet. This might look to others like sheer arrogance, or extreme gullibility. However, your gambles frequently come off, and more often than not your intuition does reveal something that others cannot see. The problem is that you can become so reliant on this gift that you develop a dependency that is compulsive in its intensity. Left without that magical connection to the ineffable, you can panic and fall prey to all kinds of anxieties and negative imaginings that undermine your confidence. You may experience meaningful interventions throughout your life. But you can't assume that they will always occur, and you will need to learn enough realism and patience to get through the times when the divine is not available to answer your call. You may have a long family history of deeply conventional thinking which has made it hard for individuals in your family background to express any real originality. It's particularly important for you to recognise your own craving for new ideas and ways of living, for otherwise those ideas may erupt unexpectedly and compulsively, disrupting the even keel of your life. The ability to intuit when it is time for a major change, and the courage to initiate that change even if it costs your stability and security, are both extremely positive qualities that reflect a deep trust in something greater than yourself. But if you become a glutton for the excitement and glamour of change, and for the belief that your vision will always give you a correct glimpse of the future, you might be wise to bear in mind the Delphic Oracle of ancient Greece, and the fact that the god Apollo, who presided over the Oracle through the mouthpiece of the Pythoness, his priestess, was called 'double-tongued'. Oracles, powerful synchronicities, intuitive visions, and revelations from the non-rational realm may often be double-tongued; the god might not mean what we think he means, and assuming that one's own interpretation is always the right one constitutes a form of dangerous arrogance. Your craving for regular injections of intuitive inspiration can comprise a kind of Gluttony that is difficult to recognise because it looks so glamorous and sounds so much 'higher' than the ordinary common sense by which many people must steer their lives. Try to enjoy and benefit from this gift while maintaining a firm respect for the value of common sense. Even more importantly, try to recognise fully the value of patience, time, and experience, which are always the best test of revelations, whatever the source.

### I feel, therefore I am
Your emotional responses are so fast, and often so intense, that before you even realise it you are expressing extreme feelings whose impact on others can be considerable. You can swing from great rage to great gentleness and compassion to great delight, and your craving for the aliveness this gives you will obscure the effects your outpourings might have on those around you. Even if you are a self-contained person who does not 'let rip' in obviously dramatic ways, you will still manage to convey your moods in powerful, albeit non-vocal, ways. It would be pointless for you to try to become a detached and unemotional personality, for you thrive on the excitement that your constantly changing feelings generate. And you may, with some justification, feel sorry for people who are emotionally colour-blind and can't experience the richness of life as you can. However, your tendency to excess is a form of Gluttony, and it can exhaust you, get you into constant conflicts with other people as well as hurting them badly, and undermine the goals you seek to establish in your life. Your emotions are intense and immovable, and so is your pride. You can love deeply, hate bitterly, and offer loyalty for a lifetime, and you don't forgive or forget betrayals easily, if at all. You may need to cultivate greater understanding and compassion, for your possessive and sometimes controlling emotional nature can provoke the very hurts you most fear. You have a big heart, and you don't usually grudge the consequences of too much self-indulgence and too little left in the emotional bank. It is more important to you to be generous than to hoard. But if you are left with too little, then you will have too little to give. And your ready expressions of anger, resentment, and dislike can be devastating to more sensitive people, especially when they don't merit it. Try to find a workable balance between your craving for constant new emotional experiences and your fundamental human need for stability, safety, and continuity. You will never be happy living an emotionally ascetic life, for you have too great a hunger for excess, even if it is expressed in subtle rather than theatrical ways. But if you cannot temper your Gluttony, it could rob you of the very resources that allow you to pursue all that gives life enthusiasm and richness.

### Where angels fear to tread
Sometimes you can feel like a keg of dynamite just waiting to be set off. You can be bold to the point of foolhardiness, and you have a propensity to become furiously impatient if you feel thwarted by people or external circumstances. Delays can enrage you, even if they are of your own making, and when you want something, you want it right now. Your constant craving for new challenges can make it hard to accommodate the limits of ordinary everyday life. You have a surplus of energy that you tend to invest in potential rather than actuality, and there are times when you are capable of provoking an argument simply because you find consistency very boring. You feel most alive when you are courageously battling something or someone, and if the crusade has a good idea behind it, you are happy to join - provided you can lead it. Your impatience is tempered by your emotional sensitivity and your preference for flowing with circumstances rather than taking the initiative. There is deep conflict between your powerful desires and your dislike of open confrontation. You may need to learn to assert yourself more openly, for otherwise you may wind up feeling you are the victim of other people's decisions. It is likely that life itself will be your best antidote to Gluttony. However courageous you might be, you still have to live in a world in which changes happen far too slowly, and which is often run by people whom you perceive, perhaps justifiably, as stupid and incompetent. You might not have to endure more obstructions than others, but it may often feel that way. Eventually you will have to learn greater patience and tolerance because you won't have any other option. Life can provide an excellent antidote to your kind of Gluttony, simply because you will never be able to have everything you want at the moment you want it. Although this learning process is virtually guaranteed, it might help if you avoided alienating the people who want to help and support you. The most unpleasant aspect of your Gluttony is that, although you are not an unkind person, you are capable of blind and unthinking reactions when you feel thwarted, and others might not have the capacity, as you do, to shake off the dust of battle and feel invigorated afterward.

### But what does it mean?
Gluttony might seem to be one of the less serious and destructive of the Cardinal Sins, and it has provided the theme for many comic figures such as Shakespeare's Falstaff. But even this most obvious form of Gluttony is not a laughing matter, for it carries serious dangers, emotionally as well as physically. Subtler forms of Gluttony can be equally devastating because compulsions always leave us at the mercy of the unconscious complexes that rule our lives like a kind of fate. Jung, in company with many ancient philosophers, believed that compulsions did indeed constitute fate, and that only greater consciousness could break their power and allow their creative dimensions to be expressed in life. Only through a clearer recognition of the deeper symbolism behind your own Gluttony can you transform it into the kind of Aspiration that gives your life meaning, movement, hope, and faith. The mundane world is not your best friend, and you will usually try to relegate its demands to others, or flee to an imaginal realm far away from earthly limitations. But if you become a glutton for escape, your body may rebel and make its needs known through substance addictions that force you to admit that you are not just a disembodied mind. An obsessive rejection of mundane limits may also result in habit patterns such as compulsive spending, obsessive exercise and dieting, or constant hypochondria. And this kind of Gluttony can take the form of an escape from emotional commitment, leaving a trail of disappointing relationships in your wake. Your Aspiration to touch and be fired by realms of the mind and spirit that are eternal and not subject to the mortal world of change and decay is a deep and inspiring one. But make sure you don't pursue your dream to the point where you forget that you are human, and subject to the same cycles of life that all living things are part of. The deeper symbolism that lies behind Gluttony hints at the source of that mysterious spark which injects every human life with a feeling of meaning and purpose. Without this spark, human beings grow weary, cynical, and depressed, and lose their joy in living. Gluttony can reveal itself as a bright beacon illuminating a road that leads toward a sense that we are part of an intelligent pattern and can contribute meaningfully to that pattern, whatever form our abilities and talents might take. While apparently one of the least serious of the Sins, Gluttony can also be the most important in terms of its relationship with our essential human need for meaning. However, Gluttony is also one of the hardest Sins to recognise, because we try to convince ourselves that the thing we crave is too necessary to be subjected to any efforts at analysis or transformation. If you can recognise that what you believe to be a passionate and justified need might really be a destructive compulsion, then you might begin to understand that any object of obsessive desire, corporeal or non-corporeal, is a symbol that can open a door revealing that highly individual and life-enhancing Aspiration that lies behind your Gluttony.

## The Third Sin: Wrath
Wrath, the next Cardinal Sin, is what we might understand as uncontrolled rage. In Latin, it was called 'Ira', from which we derive the English word ire. Uncontrolled rage is terrifying and destructive, whether it is expressed as physical or emotional violence acted out by one individual toward another, as violence perpetrated by one group against another group or against a scapegoat, or as the more impersonal but equally horrifying acts that accompany any war - whether that war is based on religious fanaticism, material acquisitiveness, political ideology, or all these and more. Rape, abuse, and assault are not always physical; they can also be emotional and intellectual, and sometimes we are not aware that we have had a subtle kind of violence perpetrated against us, or that we ourselves might have perpetrated it. Acts of Wrath are rightly considered sins, for they are among the most horrific experiences any human being can go through. Often the scars left after such experiences never fully heal. And because we know this, we are often frightened of our own anger, because we know where it could so easily lead. In the medieval world, Wrath was associated with the Devil. But like the other Cardinal Sins, Wrath is a highly complex issue. Defensive anger is a fundamental instinct in all animal forms of life, and it can be entirely healthy and appropriate. The legal systems of most Western countries recognise the right to legitimate self-defence in the face of violence. Anger is also vitally necessary when we need to find ways to protect ourselves from psychological abuse and assert our identity as individuals. And there are moments in history when the only possible way to stem a tide of collective violence has been to respond with violence in order to survive. Uncontrolled Wrath is irredeemably destructive. But if we are unable to fight on a psychological level for the right to feel what we feel or think what we think, or to ask for well-earned respect in the world, our rage may take subtler and highly unpleasant forms. The creative face of Wrath might be called Courage, because whenever we seek to change things, inner or outer, we must display an initiative that requires bravery and honesty in equal measures. Sigmund Freud once said that the qualifications for being able to descend to the depths of oneself in order to understand one's own psyche are threefold: Courage, Courage, and Courage.

### Patience really is a virtue
You can be impulsive and impatient, and you may not always realise just how potent and frightening your temper can be if you unleash it in the moment because you feel stifled or thwarted. You have immense energy and enthusiasm, and, whether your dreams are to actualise something in the outer world or pursue a creative vision in the inner one, you do not like to be interrupted or held back by mundane details as you pursue your dreams. But your energy can be short-lived if you begin to become bored, and boredom invariably sets in when you are required to fulfil ordinary mundane tasks that demand patience and respect for details. That is when your temper is most likely to erupt, and it can appear far out of proportion to the actual situation. Try to learn to respect the limits that time places on you, and the steps that life requires to hone and craft your particular talents. Otherwise you may spend a lot of time sputtering and fuming, frightening or angering other people, and achieving far less than you are capable of.

### The anger of the escape artist
Although you love spontaneity, that doesn't apply to emotions, especially when they erupt in close relationships and others demand an emotional response you feel unable to provide. Rage at oppressive rules and regulations might not feel threatening, because it is supported by ideas about the right to personal freedom; and anger on behalf of the underdog isn't a problem because it is justified by an ideology. But the rage of someone whom you have hurt because you have betrayed or abandoned them is not something you can deal with gracefully, if you deal with it at all. The only way you can develop a creative relationship with Wrath is to discover where it lies within you, and where your own emotional needs - particularly those that involve dependency on another person - are being rationalised, stifled, or simply ignored. You might have a volatile temper, but this reflects impatience rather than true Wrath. Escape can seem easier than finding the Courage to engage in a truthful and vulnerable emotional exchange.

### The velvet underground
Bold self-assertiveness isn't really your style. Your sensitivity and reluctance to unleash anger make you eager to adapt to the needs of others. This reflects kindness and empathy, but it can be a problem when you need to express justified anger in honest ways. You can allow yourself to become a victim rather than hurting anyone else, but you may not recognise the value of a firm sense of self-worth in achieving the kind of relationships you desire. Wrath will always be a potential problem, because even a small outburst of temper can leave you feeling guilty and uncomfortable. Try to deal with Wrath consciously, rather than unleashing it unconsciously in manipulative ways, or turning it against yourself through self-destructive behaviour or bouts of depression and anxiety. You aren't likely to turn into an insensitive, boorish person who tramples over the feelings of others. But it might be helpful to be a little less enamoured of martyrdom. You have very definite opinions and views, and you need to express them openly and freely. But your constant worry about offending or hurting others can make you indirect, evasive, or even devious at times, clouding your ability to communicate clearly and generating great anger if you have to listen to others' views without daring to voice your own. You may be deeply reluctant to express, or even allow yourself to feel, strong desires. You could even try to justify your diffidence by believing that it is more spiritual or evolved, because you aren't a 'selfish' person. But you have the same instincts as other human beings, and these include aggression, self-preservation, and the assertion of your own will. Try not to hide behind beliefs that mask a deep fear of loneliness and alienation. You need to be honest with yourself, for otherwise Wrath may take indirect forms and prove more destructive to your relationships than any amount of honest anger could ever be. You may never be a fearless comicbook superhero, nor should you ever try to be. Your empathy and kindness carry their own heroism. But you will do yourself and others a disservice if you attempt to be less human than you are, when this attempt may spring from guilt and fear as well as from true generosity of spirit.

### Having the last word
Wrath will reveal itself through words and ideas rather than physical or emotional eruptions, and you can be quick to anger if you encounter opinions that conflict with yours. You can be inspired by a good debate and enraged by other people's slowness, and you are touchy and irritable if you have to wait to speak or are required to adapt to more structured ways of communicating. Early education may have been hard for you, not because you lack intelligence, but because you may have found it infuriating to adapt your independent thinking to routine methods of learning. You are outspoken, courageous in defending your convictions, and physically restless and fidgety if you are confined to one place for too long. And you can also be opinionated, verbally aggressive, and careless in your relationship to your physical environment, which can make you reckless and accident-prone if you don't reflect first before charging out into life. You have a rich and fertile imagination, and you might be happier expressing yourself through a creative medium. You can bitterly resent being asked to explain yourself, or articulate precisely how you arrived at a particular idea or course of action, since you often don't know the answer, and having to discipline your thoughts and speech can make you very angry. Your mind could be a powerful creative force, because you can 'think on your feet' and are willing to confront people whose ideas are too mired in convention, or whose lack of imagination annoys your innovative way of seeing things. But you will need tact, sensitivity, and patience, mentally and physically, if you don't want to spend your life in endless verbal squabbles, wasting your energy on pointless conflicts and championing causes whose success you may have little chance of seeing because the ideas are too abstract and impersonal. Try not to let Wrath take possession of your tongue. You can injure others as effectively as if you punched them when you verbally sting people who have angered you. The power of the war-god may always be part of human nature, but you don't have to wage battles based solely on the desire to win an argument. Find the courage to fight for a vision that truly matters to you.

### Underground explosives
Wrath is deeply entangled with your paternal inheritance. It is one of the most powerful issues in your inner life, and whatever difficult experiences might have come your way in childhood, you need to explore issues of anger, self-assertiveness, passivity, weakness, and all the other factors that concern human will and its frustration. Don't run away from anger because you encountered one of its uglier faces when you weren't old enough to make a choice. Instead, try to understand why it was such an important factor in your family background, and the ways in which it may have been used, abused, or stifled. You are more likely to suppress anger than many people because the anger you feel may be much older than you yourself are. Courage is needed for the kind of inner exploration you need to make, but you are not lacking in either courage or tenacity. Try to learn as much as you can about your father's history, and his father's, and his grandfather's before him. Insight can help you to understand the role Wrath has played in your family past, the creative as well as destructive patterns it generated, and the positive ways in which you can express it in your own life.

### Charm and conquest
You can be the most agreeable person in the world while you assiduously pursue exactly what you want. This combination of charm and self-will makes you charismatic and persuasive, although some people might find you too opaque about what you are really after. You love the challenge of winning people over, especially those who might oppose you if you were more aggressively self-assertive. As the saying goes, you can catch more flies with honey than with vinegar, and you understand this proverb deep in your soul. You genuinely desire harmony, but you also thrive on the promise of winning a difficult battle. The problem lies in your inability to be honest about your desires even when you don't need to exercise charm. You can provoke quarrels because the reconciliations feel so exhilarating, and this can be exhausting and painful for those close to you. Try not to see every human encounter as an opportunity for conquest. Your empathy and dislike of aloneness, combined with your love of conflict, may make it difficult for you to sustain long-term relationships if partners require emotional as well as physical constancy. Either you will need to accept turbulence in your life, or you will need the right creative outlets that allow you to express your romantic longings and fantasies. If you can accept yourself as you are - someone who longs for fresh challenges that can inspire you in love and in work - you may be able to work creatively with the kind of Wrath that can arise if you try to make yourself fit some kind of ideal behavioural model in which no one ever has a fight or becomes bored. But great resentment can also accumulate if you reject your need for closeness and stability in relationships, and you may alienate those whom you need most. Whatever your moral and ethical principles, it is important to be loyal to these principles and honest about them with others, rather than seeking escapes that avoid the deeper meaning of your inner dissatisfaction. If you experience chronic sexual restlessness, it might not really be about sex, but could reflect an urgent need to find new ways of expressing your creative imagination through your work and in your everyday life.

### Rebel without a cause
You are sometimes so touchy and ready to fight that you can behave like a rent-an-argument service. You dislike even the slightest whiff of anything resembling an order or a demand, no matter how legitimate it might be, and you can expend a lot of energy doing battle when you aren't even clear about what you are fighting about. Try to be more conscious of the kinds of things that trigger your anger, and learn to express Wrath with more moderation. Otherwise it can rebound in self-destructive behaviour, physically as well as socially, if you are wilfully unconscious of what sets your temper off. You can be bold and innovative in ideas and actions, and you have a taste for danger that is sometimes admirable but sometimes simply foolish. You need a cause to fight for, especially one you truly believe in, but that requires time for reflection, and you are not the most patient of souls. You have a revolutionary spirit that runs back far into your family past, and you are attuned to it in potentially creative ways. Make sure you don't act as the unwitting mouthpiece for great rage and explosive behaviour. You need firm individual boundaries and the capacity to reflect on the ideas that inspire you, rather than being carried away by a Wrath that is many generations old. Don't expend your considerable energy and originality on trivial acts of angry rebellion when you could be doing something much more constructive with your talents. You could harm yourself as well as others if you just go around kicking out blindly, because you can become so angry at restriction that you act thoughtlessly, hurting others or causing damage to yourself because you aren't paying enough attention to the people and objects around you. You are attuned to larger currents in the world and respond to big trends in thinking, especially those concerned with human progress. This capacity to envisage and contribute to a better human future would serve you better than hurling yourself against anything you perceive as an obstacle to your desires. There are problems in the world that merit the creative use of Wrath, and you could make a valid contribution to working with those problems.

### The subtle knife
You love a lively, articulate debate, and you are gifted at applying your fine mental and physical coordination to projects that require inventiveness and technical skill. You can be argumentative and sharp, and you may speak before you reflect, but you have the courage to affirm your ideas through words or practical skills, and you need work that allows you to wage an intellectual crusade or invent a new method or technique. You can be quick and cutting in your verbal expression, going straight to the heart of a matter and dissecting it with skill. If you become really angry, you can be devastating in your verbal volleys, and your own rage may frighten you because of the accuracy of its aim. If that rage is unconscious, your gift can be a lethal weapon in close relationships, because you are capable of going directly for the jugular vein and demolishing with great precision the person who has angered you. You are a pragmatic thinker, and you may excel at solving challenging practical problems that defeat less capable minds. You know the value of tact, silence, and even duplicity when required. But you may overlook subtler, less tangible spheres of life in your efforts to control your environment and make the world conform to an idea of how you think it should be. You have a fine gift that could provide a creative outlet for Wrath, enlisting the courage that lies at its heart and directing it toward goals that make the best use of your mental and physical abilities. But you will be able to make full use of this gift only if you have some awareness of the workings of anger within yourself. The greater your consciousness, the more constructive you can be in enlisting Wrath for ends that enhance and improve your own life and that of others. The less conscious you are, the more destructive you are likely to be, because your powerful arsenal of verbal weapons, unleashed without any conscious monitor, can wound the people closest to you and alienate those with whom you work. But it's likely that you already have considerable awareness of your inner dynamics, because your penetrating mind and preference for realities rather than fantasies ensure that you don't remain oblivious for long.

### Sulks and tantrums
Be careful of dramatising your responses to situations that arouse your anger. Lack of reflection can make you behave in rash and impulsive ways that may get you in trouble. Your anger is exaggerated by your tendency to see everything as a Shakespearean drama, in which a mildly annoying person becomes a dangerous villain, and a sensible restriction placed on your freedom becomes imprisonment in a dungeon. You can be exceedingly self-willed because you inflate everything, including your desires and the anger that quickly erupts when those desires aren't immediately fulfilled. You have immense energy, but sometimes you don't know what to do with it, and impatience can be a serious handicap if you are trying to enlist the cooperation of others or pursue a task that requires careful attention. At times you can behave like a small child having a very large tantrum, and collisions with authority are usually of your own making. Your craving for freedom and unfenced pastures to explore ensures that you have little tolerance for demands and responsibilities that make you feel caged. This can result in explosions of rage, and, if you are angry enough, in insensitive behaviour that hurts those around you - not because you are malicious or heartless, but because you cannot bear to feel fenced in. Your rage isn't likely to be malicious or spiteful. It would be destructive to repress anger, but equally destructive to unleash it unthinkingly, especially when your relationships, your work, or your legal freedoms are at stake. Putting your energy into pursuits that avoid the frustration of repetitive tasks and the constriction of others' authority can help you to avoid unnecessary explosions. Remind yourself on a regular basis that not everyone possesses your courage and willingness to take risks; they may be frightened by your impulsiveness, or threatened by your tendency to bring things out into the open that they would rather keep hidden behind closed doors. Greater tolerance for those lacking your fighting spirit can help you to temper Wrath without repressing it, and a working life that offers a high degree of autonomy can help you to overcome the resentment that comes from feeling your freedom has been compromised.

### Fighting to become
Wrath can be a terrifying and destructive experience, whether it erupts within us or we experience it at the hands of others. But Wrath is also deeply linked with courage and the spark of individuality that allows us to fight for the right to become ourselves. Obvious Wrath can be observed in any act of violence or abuse, physical or psychological, but indirect Wrath is a lot harder to spot. It can take the form of spite, where a person unconsciously, or perhaps deliberately, tries to wound or belittle another person because of an imagined slight or injury, or because of corrosive Envy. Indirect Wrath can also turn against the person feeling it, and then it can become self-destructive: a repeating pattern of feeling exploited, bullied, injured, or controlled. Wrath can also, if powerfully repressed, emerge through the body, expressing itself in psychologically linked symptoms that mysteriously reflect the nature of Wrath itself: burning, itching, and inflammation, as well as addictions that numb the furious fire. To transform Wrath into courage, you must find the courage to confront your own Wrath. Wrath will never be your friend because of your idealism, and it is unlikely that you will ever value the archetypal image of the warrior, even if you are drawn to a profession that requires physical agility. But Wrath, constructively channelled, could be an important ally in your efforts to come to terms with the sense of imprisonment you feel amidst the restrictions of the material world. You have a chronic sense of resentment toward the limits created by authorities you do not respect. This anger will always bubble beneath the surface simply because you are a mortal being in a physical body and thus subject to the imperfections of the world and the people in it. But if you can curb your restlessness long enough to direct your anger into creative projects that invoke deeper or higher levels of awareness, you can express a different kind of courage: one that heals and inspires through ideas rather than through physical battle. Wrath is perhaps the most frightening of the seven Sins, because its expressions often involve physical harm to others and to oneself. But like the other Sins, Wrath has a core that is immensely creative and necessary for the unfolding of life and of your own individuality. The most difficult and paradoxical dimension of Wrath in the modern world is its suppression and denigration through our sometimes impossible ideals and ideologies. Because humans so often feel guilty and ashamed about even the most justified anger, unjustified rage erupts in ways that are often out of control, in collectives as well as individuals. The more you as an individual can explore the nature and causes of your anger, your resentment, your feelings of powerlessness, and your urge to have greater power and self-determination, the more Courage you will discover to help you deal with life, and your own emotions, honestly and fairly.

## The Fourth Sin: Pride
The Fourth Cardinal Sin, according to the early Church Fathers, is Pride, which in Latin was known as 'Superbia'. From this Latin root we get the English word superb. The sin of Pride, in its worst forms, reflects one's conviction that one is indeed superb, and vastly superior to other, lesser beings. But Pride, as with all the Cardinal Sins, can be much more complex. There are forms of pride that are positive and life-affirming - for example, the pride that makes us desire to be self-sufficient rather than utterly dependent on others, or the pride that makes us determined to uphold a conviction or a promise even when we feel very afraid. In both these examples, however, the core of the complex issue of Pride is revealed: it can only exist in relation to others. When we are by ourselves, we don't tend to feel proud, because there is no one to impress. And the sin of Pride is really about impressing others and at the same time making it clear that we are superior in some way. But Pride, like the other sins, has a deeper and more mysterious core. This core is concerned with love, but not the love that we experience for other people. It is really love of that inner spirit - what the Greeks called the 'daimon' - that we might sometimes glimpse in rare moments when we experience a sense of real connection with a greater universe and a strong feeling of personal destiny. In some ancient philosophies it was believed that each soul was given a 'daimon' at birth: a companion, guide, and embodiment of the individual's destined path in life. Jung called it the Self, and others have given it other names. When we are in touch with it, we have no need to use Pride as a way of impressing others, or making ourselves feel powerful and important. Pride in achievements or talents has its uses, but it can easily slip into the arrogance of 'Superbia', especially as a way of compensating for inner insecurities. Pride in our loyalty to our 'daimon' or inner Self reflects the nature of the love that the sin of Pride conceals at its core.

### Descending from Olympus
You take pride in your intuitive vision and eye for opportunities, for it is in the sphere of the imagination that you are most at home. You can see the potential in things and are able to trust life enough to explore that potential and make a lot of it real, and your optimism is infectious. Make sure that Pride doesn't give you a sense of superiority over others who are less imaginative, less talented, or less open to sudden inspirations than you are. You may also fall victim to a kind of spiritual pride, which could make you feel you are somehow more evolved than other, 'younger' souls. Or you may imagine that you possess a divinely given talent that should exempt you from the dreary treadmill of everyday responsibilities. But the ability to function in daily life is as important as your dreams, and it is only through learning to value such skills and work to develop them better that you can develop real self-esteem.

### Living on the earth
Your sense of being a special person with a special destiny can lead you to pursue distant horizons rather than a safe and conventional life. You take pride in your ability to make meaningful connections, and in your capacity to see potential opportunities that others miss. But try to avoid looking down on those ordinary mortals who don't share your vision or are unwilling to take the risks you do. Sometimes your leaps are not a brave journey toward a vision, but a panicked running away from entrapment in a mundane world you are afraid you can't cope with. False Pride can make you fail to recognise your own limits, as well as the emotional limits of others and the limits facing any individual trying to survive in a tough material world. A solid sense of self-esteem can emerge if you can balance your restlessness with sufficient humility and recognition of the value of commitment to the world you live in, and not just the one that exists in your imagination.

### The common touch
You take pride in your broad vision of life and your ability to understand reasons for even the most chaotic of human messes. You are concerned with the unity of the human family and the social and psychological currents that underpin social history. Your wide-ranging mind is one of your greatest gifts, and so is your genuinely democratic attitude toward others. But false Pride can replace justifiable pride if you begin to believe that you know all the solutions to human problems, and that others need to accept your ideas in order to sort out their difficulties. You aren't a Cosmic Social Crusader who can save the world from itself. Reason will never explain or eradicate human instincts and human emotions, both of which may, despite your convictions, be valid ways of interacting with reality; and this includes your own instincts and emotions, which are often ignored or suppressed if they don't fit your idea of what you think you should be. You have an inquiring and curious mind, and the further you take your education, the more fulfilled you are likely to be. But make sure you respect the knowledge of others, for you may experience many difficulties based on too much pride in your own ideas, rather than recognising the need for more openness and flexibility in your thinking. Even if you aren't drawn to direct involvement with others, but prefer to pursue your own creative or intellectual work, nevertheless you may secretly despise those who are chiefly concerned with their emotional and material security or their creative projects, or who aren't all that interested in the welfare of people they have never met, or who prefer their own company to the world of groups and collectives. You cannot avoid being a political animal, even if your primary focus is your friends, family, and neighbourhood. Your idealism and integrity are valuable qualities. But be careful not to avoid or denigrate the realm of human feelings, which are highly individual and will always refuse to be categorised, explained, or suppressed through the imposition of intellectual models and standards. Genuine self-esteem depends on living and valuing your complete individuality, and not just the rational part.

### Lost in translation
Communication is vital to your sense of confidence. You love learning and you need to pass on any knowledge you acquire. You can enlighten and inspire the minds of others, and you may be a gifted writer or storyteller. But false Pride can make you tricky and even deceitful if you pretend to know more than you do in order to assert your superiority. Make sure your ideas are based on sound original research and creative thinking, and not on a clever presentation of what you think people want to hear. And try to allow others the chance to express their own ideas. Turning communication into a monologue rather than a dialogue won't help you to feel more worthwhile. You are justifiably proud of your genuine interest in people and in the world around you. Make sure you express yourself clearly and honestly. Pride in a discourse based on evasion or the borrowing of others' original ideas can leave you feeling hollow, isolated, and lonely. You are justifiably proud of your clear thinking and your ability to focus on the bigger picture, whether this is scientific, sociological, technological, or humanitarian. You are a natural researcher with a great respect for logic and systematic thought. But genuine self-esteem also needs recognition and expression of your feelings, intuitions, and emotional needs. You need to discover and have faith in your own unique voice, even if that voice wasn't listened to or valued in your early life by family or educational authorities. You have your own mode of expression and your own vision to pursue. Don't pretend to be what you are not, but try to value the particular kind of intelligence that is genuinely your own. The more authentic you can be in communicating what you think, feel, and believe in, the more genuine self-esteem you will develop. Your perennial curiosity may demand that you need to explore a wide range of ideas, world-views, cultures, and beliefs. You also need breathing space, for communication itself is a kind of breathing that requires intake as well as output. Try to become as good at learning from others as you are at offering learning to others. And beware of false Pride, which can make you dismiss others' ideas because you haven't yet found enough confidence to believe in your own.

### Life can be unfair
Paradoxically, your sense of injury may be more helpful in transforming false Pride than a sense of confidence. But you will need a lot of self-honesty in order to turn this hurt into a creative force. You carry a sense of being wounded in some way, and a conviction - conscious or not - that life has treated you unfairly. Perhaps you were marginalised or scapegoated in early life, and you don't expect others to express any belief in your value as an individual. You know all too well how unfair life can be, and how unjustly humans can treat each other. There is a deep pocket of cynicism in you that can't believe life could be generous, that most people are fundamentally decent, or that good things can happen to you. Yet this wound can help you to feel deep compassion, counter the tendency to false Pride, and act as a spur to develop your individuality. Your deepest insecurities focus on everyday mundane life, and perhaps also on your own body. You may have been especially sensitive as a child, or suffered ailments more frequently than others. Your relationship with mundane routines and rituals can be fraught with a sense of anxiety and an uneasy feeling that you won't be able to cope. You may feel powerless in the face of forces in society that could easily stamp on you or render your efforts worthless. But your perspective has been distorted by your personal experiences, or by your interpretation of your experiences, and this can make you identify with victims and scapegoats everywhere. This can be destructive, but it can also generate deep understanding and empathy, and a desire to offer something to others whom life has treated unfairly. You may also feel deep loneliness, as though no one could possibly comprehend all that you have been through. But you may seriously underestimate other people. No matter how critical you might be of the world around you, try to understand that humans are fallible and that your value does not depend on the mess that they make out of their world. A more detached perspective can help you to transform grievances into a powerful and healing creative force.

### The Self behind the self
The Sin of Pride has many faces. The kind of pride expressed through characteristic manifestations such as pride in accomplishments, pride in family, group, or nation, or pride in personal qualities, is not in itself sinful. Pride has many positive and confidence-building qualities, even in its most worldly forms. But the Sin of Pride as Superbia - a sense of superiority - can indeed be a Sin, because it belittles the value of others and can justify controlling or harming them in the name of one's own greater cleverness, talent, spiritual evolution, empathy, or social awareness. A sense of self-worth rooted in a deep connection with an inner Self that is both individual and part of a larger unity is the antidote to the more destructive expressions of Pride, transforming it into a love of the mystery that lies behind the gifts, successes, achievements, sufferings, struggles, and rewards you have experienced in life. You may always experience conflict between your longing for freedom and the limits of the world in which you live, including your own limits as an ordinary mortal. Try not to immerse yourself so deeply in the world of possibilities that you fail to give sufficient value and respect to the world of realities. You are justifiably proud of your ingenuity and vision, but false Pride can be a defence against the painful business of coping with everyday life and with other people's feelings as well as the painful aloneness of fearing commitment. However gifted you might be, it won't exempt you from emotional and material responsibilities, or give you the absolute freedom to do what you please. No human can ever be entirely free because your physical body imposes its own limits, and your emotional and material needs impose yet more. You won't build a genuine sense of self-esteem by trying to escape life, but you may find it through becoming a whole person. Pride, of all the Cardinal Sins, is the one most intimately related to a sense of destiny and purpose. Learning to differentiate between what you have achieved through your own effort and dedication, and what you have been given as gifts for which you are a custodian, a vehicle, and a mouthpiece, is not an easy task for anyone. It is particularly difficult because, even if the mysterious source of your gifts is acknowledged as something other than yourself, Pride can slip in and claim superiority because you might secretly feel you are some kind of chosen vessel. Pride needs an equal measure of the antidote of humility before it can reveal its most creative face. Michelangelo once described the art of sculpting as releasing the innate design already inherent in the stone, rather than making it up himself. It is in this spirit of recognising that each of us is a vessel for a special individuality that Pride can become a source of love - including that elusive expression we often misunderstand and call self-love, which is really love of the Self.

## The Fifth Sin: Lust
The Fifth Cardinal Sin is Lust. This sin was called 'Luxuria' in the medieval Christian world, and it was related to sexual desire and what was known as voluptuousness: unbridled sensuality. Times have changed since then, and Lust is hardly viewed as a sin these days in Western cultures; it is more surprising to encounter individuals of either sex who deny feeling it or, for that matter, doing their utmost to satisfy it. And when Lust is experienced and pursued between consenting adults, it is indeed difficult to perceive it as a sin. In recent times it has become an image of glamour, adding spice to advertisements for perfume, cosmetics, clothing, automobiles, mobile phones, and even household goods like toilet cleaners and kitchen towels. We lust after film stars and pop singers, and referring to someone as 'eye candy' is intended as a compliment. We devour with our eyes the person who arouses our lust. But in older texts describing the soul's journey from its heavenly home into earthly incarnation, the term used for Lust was not exclusively sexual, nor even necessarily sensual. It was described as 'the Lust whereby men are deceived', suggesting that desire in itself is not a sin, but that it can become compulsive and destructive when it involves self-deception or the deception of others. Lust was also called 'Inappropriate Longing', revealing yet another, subtler, yet extremely important dimension of Lust: desiring that which one has no right to desire. And erotic desire is not necessarily exclusively sensual either; the great god Eros, from whose name we get the word 'erotic', was understood as that cosmic power which bound the disparate elements of the universe together, and this great deity symbolised intense passion of any kind, including intellectual and spiritual desire. The sin of Lust is not, after all, simply 'unbridled sensuality'. And if we can begin to understand what constitutes 'inappropriate longing' for each individual, Lust might turn out to be an immensely creative force; for what we cannot possess in the outer world, we can nourish in the inner, and discover in the process a profound experience of joy.

### Rendering unto Caesar
Any desire that promises to expand your horizons can be justified by your belief that life should be inspiring and meaningful. But the pursuit of a glorious treasure, romantic or otherwise, is not the way in which Lust is likely to appear in your life. You may find yourself in a web of material deceptions that undermine the openness and honesty that reflect your generous nature, and an inappropriate longing for complete freedom from mundane limits, especially if you desire what you haven't worked for, can become a heavy load to carry. There is nothing 'sinful' about wanting material comfort and sensual gratification. But deception and self-deception in mundane matters may make you justify questionable actions that undermine your integrity as well as injuring others. The irritating voices of conscience and a sense of responsibility can help you to transform Lust into a recognition that there are no free lunches.

### The delights of the unobtainable
The impossible longing and the unobtainable love are familiar experiences, and you thrive on them because they catapult you out of the claustrophobic world of mundane life into the realm of romance and vision. You can intuitively understand the joys and frustrations of the medieval ideal of courtly love - a chronically unsatisfied state of desire - and, like your medieval counterparts, you may aspire to turn it into poetry, art, or spiritual vision. But this subtle form of Lust may protect you from the material obligations that bind individuals in relationships and family commitments. A state of chronic Lust for what you can't have may inspire creative vision, but it can also leave you feeling empty and unreal, as though life has passed you by. Fear of embodiment in the world may make your poetic longing truly inappropriate, but it could, with greater self-honesty and realism, enrich your everyday life with joy.

### It's all connected
You long for oneness with others and an end to feelings of separateness and aloneness. Although you are as capable of sensual Lust as anyone else, on a deeper level your desires are spiritual rather than corporeal, and you often confuse the two. Physical pleasure, however delightful, is a gateway into a union with the ineffable. This yearning to lose yourself can generate a constant hunger that might lack discrimination, making you vulnerable to being the seduced, the seducer, or both - not because you are sensually greedy or incapable of commitment, but because an unobtainable Something lures you on. You are sensitive and empathetic, perhaps too much for your own good. Indiscriminate openness can create a lot of unhappiness, for yourself and for others. Learn to contain your longing and find an appropriate creative vehicle for your rich imagination, while you cultivate more realism and better boundaries in your personal life. You love knowledge and the communication of your inner world, but your language is that of feeling, poetry, and images rather than intellect, facts, and concepts. This may have caused problems in your early education, and it may cause problems now in your efforts to explain yourself to those who are unable to recognise the unity of the inner world that is so real to you. You are sometimes too empathetic, and you may misuse this valuable gift to fulfil your desire for a few brief moments when you can lose yourself in the ineffable. Try to recognise when you are genuinely drawn to another individual, and when you might be using lovers or partners as a means to achieve an experience that has little to do with the actual person. This is a form of exploitation, although you can also be the one who gets exploited because you crave closeness so much that you allow your own resources and feelings to be used by someone more self-centred, or someone needier than you. Whether you are the victim or the perpetrator of emotional exploitation, or perhaps both at the same time, you need to be detached enough to see when you are avoiding the painful reality of separateness and cloaking that avoidance with a mystical vision that can never be satiated in everyday mundane life.

### Putting in a good word
You aren't unduly troubled by sensual Lust, although this doesn't mean you don't experience it or act on it. But Lust can work in subtler ways. You long for the pleasure and stimulation of knowledge, and for a constant stream of people with whom you can communicate in order to pursue your quest. This isn't intrinsically destructive, and it enhances your understanding of life and of the world and could make you a gifted scholar, teacher, writer, or communicator. But your restless longing for unending mental stimulation can make you value the exchange more than the individuals you communicate with, and you may use your charm and fluency to win people over so that you can 'pick their brains' and move on when you become bored. Your desire to learn everything about everything can make you skim the surface of knowledge; be careful of becoming a mental butterfly with lots of information and no real mastery of any subject. You long for knowledge, and it comes more easily through the imagination and the heart than through facts and logical thinking. Even if you are involved in scientific work, your intuition is one of your greatest assets. The unified world you long for may always elude logic, but a creative vehicle could allow you to express what cannot be rationally explained or communicated. Your longing for mental stimulation can make you to try to impress others with your intelligence. If you succeed, you may move on to the next individual and the next idea, for you are more in love with the beauty of the mind than with forming relationships with the people you engage with. Try to avoid drawing others into exchanges that suit your momentary requirements but disregard their feelings. Elegant modes of communication are not destructive, and grace of expression is one of your gifts. But you may ignore the emotional currents flowing beneath the surface, and you may find it hard to engage in discussions about feelings. Find the right mode of creative expression and develop your talents as fully as you can. But remember that communication always involves two people, not just a speaker and an audience, and it occurs on many levels, some of them subtle, paradoxical, and hidden beneath all those elegant words.

### Big appetites
Whatever the object of your desire, you are likely to be excessive about it. When you long for something, you long for it with your whole heart, and you can behave in inappropriate ways to get it; but when you become disillusioned with it, you can be just as strongly repelled by what you thought would bring you happiness only a short time before. You are generous with feelings and possessions, and you know how to offer encouragement, warmth, and kindness without expecting benefits. You have a big heart, and assume that others will have one too. But you may need to tone down the drama and curb the appetites, especially when it comes to the Great Love - which is likely to happen to you more than once in your life. You long for pleasure, whether physical, emotional, or spiritual, and you want the pleasure to last forever. When it doesn't, you can be very annoyed and disappointed, because you sometimes expect too much from life. You have deep faith in life, and you firmly believe in some positive force or higher Other that supports and protects you in hard times. This is a wonderful gift, but make sure you don't abuse it. You may have to stand on your own feet and deal realistically with the tougher, more worldly aspects of life, and your generous heart won't buy you exemptions from human limits. You yearn for meaning and inspiration in your pursuit of pleasure, and this can be uplifting and enriching. But sometimes there isn't any deeper meaning - it's just you wanting something in the moment and then seeking a way of justifying it. There is no reason why you shouldn't enjoy life to the full, and there is no point in feeling that some stern cosmic judge is always watching and expecting you to grow up. But don't use a longing for meaning as an excuse for untrammelled self-indulgence. Be honest with yourself, and if you get into a mess through your excesses, take responsibility for it, contain your desires when required, and learn to laugh at yourself. If you need more drama in your life - and it's likely that you always will - pursue it through creative work. This might be less disappointing and less onerous for loved ones than perpetually seeking the excitement of a Mozart opera in every relationship you encounter.

### Songs of experience
You long for structure and security in your relationships, and your choice of partners is more likely to be based on realism than on passion. Your desire to ensure your emotional and material safety makes you loyal and responsible, and a careful contributor to the material well-being of those you care for. But your longing can become 'inappropriate' if you are too calculating in realms where your heart should have an equal voice. Be careful of using others for your own gain, or remaining in an unhappy but financially beneficial relationship because you are too afraid to face the uncertainty of an independent life. Try to be honest about why you choose to involve yourself with the people close to you, and make sure you are honest with them as well. There is nothing wrong with wanting security and support from a partnership. But love and self-protection don't mix well, especially if the self-protection is based on fear of hurt and loneliness. Groups and networks of like-minded people give you a sense of structure and stability. But you aren't as much of a team player as you might like to think, and you can often feel isolated or misunderstood. You are a leader rather than a follower, and you need to pursue your own goals. Make sure you don't use partners, friends, and colleagues to prop you up. You might benefit from exploring more deeply the fear of rejection that underpins your desire for safe relationships in which you feel in control. A lack of self-worth may reflect early experiences where love was conditional and had to be earned, and where you had to acquire a maturity and pragmatism that have made it hard for you to be open to the joy of spontaneous affection. You are strong enough, and shrewd enough, to have found your way through early unhappiness, and you usually land on your feet. But your past is linked to your relationship patterns in the present. You tend to choose wisely, but worldly wisdom can thwart a deeper, more romantic longing to love simply for the pleasure of loving, rather than hedging relationships with safety guards and an insistence on a guaranteed outcome. Realism is a valuable aspect of your personality. Too much realism may leave you with sensual lust but not enough joy.

### Breaking glass
You long for the freedom to live and love according to your own values, in relationships and in the material world. But absolute freedom isn't possible for any human being. Perhaps an ancient Roman emperor might have experienced it in brief moments, or a mythic potentate in a fairy tale. But you won't achieve this ideal of freedom except on an inner level and in creative work, which are the deeper dimensions of your longing. You may consciously deny your rebellious spirit, and choose a partner who acts it out for you and leaves you feeling abandoned. Or you may be the one who abandons others the moment you feel trapped by emotional demands you can't or don't wish to meet. Lust for absolute freedom is 'inappropriate' because all humans are bound to each other, materially, emotionally, and spiritually. Even if you justify your yearning through an ideology that sanctions it, your own emotional needs will catch up with you sooner or later. You are highly sensitive to new ideas emerging from the collective psyche, and this can be frightening if these disruptive currents overwhelm you and threaten the security of your personal life. Try to find a creative channel through which you can express your vision, but make sure you tend to your personal relationships with care and sensitivity. The pursuit of freedom from all conventions and constraints may require an absolute emotional detachment and cruelty that you find shocking and distasteful. If you find it distasteful enough, you may reject your longing so strongly that you aren't even aware of it, and unconsciously choose partners who are uncomfortable with commitment; or you might inadvertently provoke them into leaving you. But you could balance your entirely appropriate desire for stable, loving companionship with an equally appropriate desire for independence and original self-expression. C. G. Jung once wrote that free will is the ability to do gladly that which you must do. And you 'must' acknowledge your human emotional and instinctual needs, as well as your yearning for freedom. Your inner conflict could be a powerful creative force, if you can find the honesty to be who you are while honouring not only your own feelings, but also the feelings of others.

### The war of the roses
Lust is bound up with your need to win, and you don't feel any real desire unless there is a prize to be won. If you succeed, you feel powerful and confident; if you lose, you feel as if you have lost your potency in life. The equation of passion with winning affects the way in which you pursue the desired object: at first you can be overly accommodating and eager to please, but just when others think you are easy to manage, you come in punching and make it clear that you are going to have your own way. You are magnetic and attract others easily, and your life won't ever lack excitement and passion. But if you turn everything into a contest, and your desires are always stronger if there are rivals for the prize, you may have many problems in long-term relationships. You may lose interest unless you are challenged by a partner who refuses to be a prize. But the endless conflicts can be exhausting for you both, and can rob the relationship of joy. You prefer compromise to confrontation, because what you want usually reflects what others want, and it can be hard for you to focus on or value your own desires. This can make you a gentle and accommodating partner, but you may build up considerable resentment and anger over time if you fail to acknowledge or express your own will and your right to individual autonomy. Creative work may provide a helpful outlet through which you can express both your love of beauty and your longing for challenge. You will have fewer messes in your emotional life, and could achieve a great deal in both worldly and creative terms. But if you don't have a constantly challenging creative and working life, you may find that relationships become a battleground in which either you or your partner, or perhaps both of you, are constantly quarrelling, making up, quarrelling again, and causing each other unnecessary pain. Don't confuse other people with the real object of your Lust, because ultimately no human will satisfy your complex longing; you need to discover endless new creative possibilities within yourself. Although the challenge of an elusive love object may be the trigger for inspiration, you don't need an unending sequence of lovers to invoke it; you need to discover endlessly innovative ways of expressing yourself.

### Beauty and the Best
Lust, however harmless we might perceive it in our so-called 'permissive society', can be a powerfully destructive force. Homer, in The Iliad, wrote of the ruin of the great city of Troy through the lust of Paris, a Trojan prince, for Helen, the queen of Sparta, who happened to be married to someone else. Myth and literature are full of the corrosive effects of Lust, and its dangers don't always reflect the precepts of an intolerant religious or moral doctrine. Lust is as psychological as all the other Sins, and it confronts us with the necessity of recognising the limits life places on our desires and dreams. Yet because of the elusiveness of the true symbolic nature of Lust, we may not recognise when we are possessed by it, and we may try to convince ourselves that our desires are legitimate and even selfless, and therefore merit gratification without any inner reflection. You long for a future that promises freedom from the limits of the present and the past, and you want to escape from everything you find tough and tedious in life. Since you are a human living in a physical world, this longing will always be doomed to failure. It can't be cured by slipping through the door marked 'Fire Exit' when no one is watching, and it may get more intense as you get older because the escape routes diminish and reality will always be there waiting. You have the gift of intuiting possibilities, which gives you a sense of hope and confidence. But look hard at your yearning for a future devoid of the difficulties of the present. It may be unwise to accumulate a queue of injured loved ones whom you have abandoned because they wanted a greater commitment than you were willing to offer. Efforts to deal with emotional relationships honestly could bring real joy into your life, rather than an endless longing for the impossible. You will never truly possess the object of your Lust in the outer world, because the thing you really lust for is not 'out there'. Nor are you likely to possess it in the inner world as an unchanging state of enlightenment, perfection, or transcendence. No amount of machination, force, deception, self-deception, or self-sacrifice will satisfy Lust, because by its nature the object of your longing is a symbol of something ineffable. The more you can grasp this, the more easily you will recognise when you are slipping into the web of Lust, and the more creatively you will handle the frustration and unhappiness that inevitably accompany any effort to contain intense desire. Seeing beyond the form of an outer object, or accepting the impossibility of an inner ideal of perfection, is not the same as self-sacrifice; but they are prerequisites for a connection with the archetype of beauty within you and the transformation of Lust into joy.

## The Sixth Sin: Deceit
Deceit, the Sixth of the Cardinal Sins, was known as 'Avaritia' in Latin. The term Deceit, usually referred to as Avarice in medieval descriptions of the Sins, is based on a much older text that calls it 'the machinations of evil cunning'. This Sin was also known as Covetousness. Avarice and Covetousness, which are an unpleasant mix of Deceit and Greed, require cunning and machination to achieve their aims, since others are unlikely to simply give us whatever we want, especially if we have no right to it. Deceit has a chameleon-like quality. It readily allies itself with any of the other Sins, and is focused on stealing what rightly belongs to another, whether the object is material, intellectual, emotional, or spiritual; and the archetypal figure behind it is the Thief. But Deceit, as anyone will know who has had to survive in life-threatening situations that require disguise and dissimulation, can reflect a realistic understanding and adaptation to the world, and it can become a preserver and protector in the face of overpowering difficulties and pressures in a dangerous world. The sin of Deceit is neither simple lying nor simple greed. It is the urge to use trickery, and can accompany a sense of superiority because successful perpetrators of Deceit believe that they are cleverer than other people and therefore entitled to dupe them. On this level, Deceit can be deeply destructive to relationships and to an individual's place in the larger community. But why should anyone choose to lie compulsively, or winkle out of others what might be given freely, or steal what should be earned through honest effort? Deceit can sometimes accompany the belief that we can have nothing worthwhile in life unless we steal it. Deceit can also flower if we believe that integrity and honesty are old-fashioned, out-of-date virtues that have no place in a tough, hard, uncompassionate world. Deceit can be supported by cynicism and a profound disregard for the feelings of others and the moral demands of inner conscience. Yet the acute intelligence, perspicacity, subtlety, and depth that successful Deceit requires could also, if combined with integrity and compassion, generate something we might call Worldly Wisdom.

### The art of reinterpreting facts
Your mind tends to process experiences more slowly than your intuitive sense of future possibilities, and this can make you annoyed with yourself, and with others, when you want something badly but seem to take forever in working out how to get it. Your heart is focused on potentials, but you need facts and practical experience to justify and ground your vision. If you can't temper your impatience with respect for your need to evaluate your ideas and choices thoroughly and clearly, your discomfort may become the source of Deceit, because you can twist facts, exaggerate, or ignore important information in order to hurry things along. Cutting corners - financial, intellectual, emotional, or spiritual - is not a good idea, because a small nagging voice inside will keep reminding you that you are running before you can walk. And the world's backlash, like the proverbial Mills of God, may grind slowly, but usually grind exceedingly small.

### The helium balloon
You tend to avoid facts that might interfere with what you perceive as Truth. Facts are constricting because they spoil your desire to live in the future, and you can exaggerate information and ignore important details in order to pursue new possibilities. You might not be deliberately intent on duping others, stealing what belongs to them, or constructing falsehoods to get what you want. But you can be childlike and self-absorbed because you see only what you wish to see, and hope that others will clean up any mess you make while you pursue your dream of absolute personal freedom. You have a mischievous desire to transcend the ordinary rules of living, including emotional and material responsibilities. That can make you economical with the truth if it helps you to avoid feeling trapped. But your playfulness can backfire badly. If you avoid committing yourself to life, people will cease to trust you, and you will cease to trust yourself.

### The tricks of the trade
You have a shrewd and cautious way of thinking that allows you to structure and organise your life in ways that give you maximum control. Since you view life without rose-tinted glasses, you don't expect to be told the truth all the time, nor do you feel obligated to tell it. Your pragmatism combines well with the high value you give to logic and systematic thought. But you can rely too much on rational explanations and concrete proofs, at the expense of your idealism and your vision of future potentials. You can be diplomatic, subtle, and even cunning when you want to communicate without generating a big storm, and you usually get your way because your subtlety ensures that others aren't aware of how determined you are to convince them. The depth and thoroughness of your thinking are valuable aids in managing mundane challenges as well as in the acquisition of knowledge. You prefer to test an idea, a plan, or a strategy over and over again until you are convinced that it is solid and firm. But if you apply this principle to other people's feelings, they may feel angry and hurt because you are so reluctant to trust them. You can be a skilled liar because you know that the most believable lies always have a large component of truth in them. Make sure you retain your integrity as well as your diplomatic skills. You can be clever and patient in mundane matters, and you could easily achieve what you desire in terms of material gain. But you need to keep one eye firmly on the way you deal with others in financial matters. Make sure you maintain your integrity. Tact and caution are helpful and positive, but manipulation and dissimulation will make you implacable enemies. Your ability to make the most constructive use of your talents depends on your moral and ethical standards, your integrity, and your willingness to serve life as well as your own ambitions. You could be a gifted manipulator who takes pleasure in fooling those less perceptive than you; or you could be a deep and subtle thinker with the power to communicate important ideas and handle major responsibilities without having to bash people over the head to make your point. Your effectiveness in the world can be considerable because of your canniness and shrewd perceptions, and you will always have a choice about the extent to which you choose prevarication over truth. In your hands, Deceit can be a powerful weapon to further your material goals; or it could be transformed into a quality of wisdom that allows you to achieve what you want with integrity, honour, and respect for the rights and feelings of others.

### Tapestries and webs
Deceit can enter your life in your dealings with the material world. You have a tapestry of talents and resources that could lead to satisfying financial rewards if you take the time to value and cultivate your skills. But you also have a quality of shrewd perceptiveness that could, if you aren't careful, lead to deliberate Deceit or, at best, a blurring of the boundaries between straightforward and duplicitous practices. Use your nimble thinking, and communicative skills in the most creative ways, but make sure you know the difference between self-worth based on your talents and the transient worth given to any skill or object in the marketplace. If you focus too much on the latter and try to weave webs to catch unsuspecting flies, you may fail to remember that what goes round comes round, and that like will always attract like. It is the expression of your gifts, rather than shrewd dealings, that will bring you inner as well as outer rewards. Your shrewd and pragmatic mind can navigate the twists and turns of the mundane world. Make sure you don't become so clever that you cut yourself. Being canny and doing what is necessary to protect your resources is a positive quality; but meanness and the justification of equivocal financial dealings can undermine your integrity and make serious enemies. Your mental and physical dexterity, your quick and perceptive responses to people and to the world around you, and your ability to communicate ideas, are among your most valuable resources. This is your true wealth, not what you are able to accumulate in the bank. Try to get the best education or training you can to refine and hone your skills. These abilities can help to give your life value, but what you are able to accrue on an ordinary material level, although useful, won't help you to feel solid and secure. You may need to be more aware of the needs and rights of the people you deal with, for you may not always be sufficiently attuned to them. As long as you preserve your integrity, you will find the wisdom to recognise that it is your inner resources that matter most, and that you can always find ways of making your talents work effectively in the external world without compromising your highest values.

### The light in the distance
You have deep insight into life's unfairness, and a sensitive response to others' pain. This gives you depth of thought and the ability to bring compassion into any form of creative expression as well as any field of healing. While your awareness may sometimes make you feel depressed about life and the human condition, it is a valuable asset that allows you to see through people's defences and masks to the core of their vulnerability. But you also need to develop detachment, perspective, and sufficient wisdom to recognise that not every sorrow in life can be blamed on a perpetrator, individual or collective. You may use Deceit as a defence if you allow your awareness of suffering to make you bitter, and forget that there are also positive and joyful dimensions to life and human nature; and you may also deceive yourself about other people's motives and justify lying or hurting them because you are so mistrustful of their motives. You are acutely aware of how unstable life can be, and how much suffering arises from lack of material resources. Try to focus on developing your own talents and resources in ways that are emotionally as well as materially satisfying to you and others, rather than stubbornly viewing the unfair nature of mundane reality as an enemy that must be destroyed. Your insight and compassion can give depth and power to your work, and your individual efforts will be more authentic and resonant than any collective movement vociferously claiming to help life's victims. But if you spend your time and energy railing against the suffering caused by others' Deceit, make sure you aren't distorting the complex realm of human interaction to nurse your own personal grievances and inadvertently practice Deceit yourself. There is a fine line between the deep compassion that arises from awareness of your own and others' pain, and a generalised sentiment that lacks real sincerity and serves ideological polemics rather than individual human beings. Keep your perspective unclouded by anger and envy, and be clear about your own motives. Then your insight and empathy will be expressed in the wisest and most helpful ways, rather than being enlisted to add yet more bitterness to the world.

### Faster than a speeding bullet
Your mental and physical energy and quickness, and your desire to cut through dross to the truth of a matter, are considerable gifts. So is your ability to quickly coordinate body and mind, which can give you skills in many different spheres, including crafts as well as sport and medicine. You can be forceful and direct, and you don't suffer fools gladly, especially the kind of fool who witters on without coming to the point. You aren't frightened of debate, even if your preference is to engage in it with courtesy. But you can also be too forceful and too willing to use sarcasm, destructive inferences, and even verbal bullying to express what you want to say. Try to be conscious of the times when you are so determined to have your own way or acquire what you desire that you are prepared to lie or bully to get it. This kind of Deceit may appropriate your talents to dominate others in ways that hurt them as well as compromising your own integrity. You are open to new ideas arising from the depths of the collective psyche, especially those that can be expressed through creative work. Make sure your personal boundaries are clear, and learn to distinguish between a collective opinion and an idea or dream that you as an individual firmly believe in. You have a fine imagination, but you aren't adept at detached reflection. Deeper personal insecurities are usually at work if Deceit takes over your mental and physical gifts and utilises them for entirely self-serving ends. You might never experience this, but equally, you might experience it frequently without even realising that you have lost touch with your conscience. Try to be aware of the impact of your words and actions on others, and don't assume that, because you are quick and insightful, you always know better or see further than them. You might not always be conscious of the force of your mind. Although you have a clarity and speed of thought greater than that of many people, you are not always right, nor does this ability make you a superior person. Learn to question yourself, especially when you are convinced of the impregnability of your own opinions. Sometimes your gifts can make you forget to respect the thoughts and feelings of the people around you.

### Underground passageways
Your instinctive secrecy makes you reluctant to share ideas and feelings with people you don't trust, and you don't trust many people. When you feel threatened, you are capable of convincing lies and skilful manipulation, and you can usually spot those who are attempting to manipulate or lie to you. But this defensive way of communicating can be painful, because you don't like dishonesty and don't like yourself when you have been deceitful. The inner tension between your dark and suspicious view of life and your strong desire for emotional truth forces you to be conscious. It can be hard for you to justify Deceit, especially if it involves power over others, for you are always examining and re-examining your conscience. You need a field of work or a creative vehicle through which to express your subtlety and sensitivity to invisible undercurrents. But without sufficient awareness, Deceit can become your constant bedfellow. Deceit may raise its head in group situations. You long to share your insights, but you don't trust the collective enough to pursue your goals openly, and often you are justified in your suspicions. Avoid manipulative behaviour, and try not to assume that everyone always has a destructive agenda. If you want power in the group, work for it honestly. Your most important tool for dealing with Deceit is deep insight into yourself. You have insight in abundance, but you need to understand your own motives as well as sensing other people's unconscious darkness and reacting to it defensively. You have an instinctive ability to view things from a psychological perspective, and even if you never study this field formally, your ability to sense falsehood and look beneath the surface of things can be immensely helpful in dealing with your own negative expectations. Although you may often be entirely justified in your cynical view of human behaviour, you may be so preoccupied with the darkness that you fail to see the light, in others and in yourself. If you are able to understand yourself, you will make wise choices in terms of what to say or not say, what to reveal or conceal, and how to navigate with tact and sensitivity the difficult currents of others' lack of awareness of their own motives and behaviour.

### What is Truth?
Deceit has been called by many names throughout history, among them Avarice and Covetousness. This Sin is like a serpent, coiling under and through our most cherished ideals and noble intentions, always masking itself as something else. Deceit can align itself with Envy, Gluttony, Wrath, Pride, Lust, and Sloth, producing hybrids that often seem socially acceptable in a world devoid of genuine worldly wisdom. Deceit is the easiest Sin to justify through the rationalisations provided by political, social, and religious ideologies, and the archetypal Thief and Liar can be a truly destructive force. But Deceit is also an immensely creative catalyst, helping us to translate innovative ideas into concrete actions. Without Deceit, no vision could achieve manifestation, no dream could ever contribute to the alleviation of human suffering, and no amount of compassion could produce the skills necessary to help actual people in actual life. Your dislike of being trapped, restricted, and subjected to material and emotional rules and demands is not in itself not deceitful. You need freedom to pursue your vision of future possibilities. But you may deceive yourself about how much material security and status matter to you as you develop your creative potentials. The same applies to emotional commitment. You may recoil from the emotional dependency of a clinging partner, and insist that you need more space; but you can deceive yourself about the depth of your own emotional needs and the fear of rejection and isolation that you secretly carry beneath your mercurial and rebellious persona. Self-deception can also show itself in the belief that you should be exempt from the limits that ordinary mortals must accommodate. For all these forms of Deceit, self-honesty is the most creative path toward developing worldly wisdom, as well as creating anything of lasting value. In an ideal, two-dimensional world without subtlety or nuance, perhaps Deceit would not be necessary; nor would any of the other Sins. Yet Deceit, in its creative forms, is truly essential in order to translate any good intention or aspiration into concrete action, and any feeling of love into an act of loving that enhances your own life and the lives of others. No higher power can accomplish the transformation of Deceit into worldly wisdom; everything depends on your willingness to pursue inner insight, your decision as an individual to confront the murky and ambiguous aspects of your own inner world, and your recognition of the multifaceted and paradoxical nature of the psyche. When you can recognise how cleverly Deceit can infuse your most cherished moral and spiritual convictions, you will be truly wise in a world that requires subtlety as well as goodness, experience as well as innocence, and realism as well as faith.

## The Seventh Sin: Sloth
The last of the Seven Cardinal Sins was known as Sloth, but earlier texts present it as 'Tristitia', which means Sadness. It was also called Indolence, and sometimes by the Latin term 'Acedia', which means Apathy. The fact that there have been so many different terms used for this last of the Sins suggests that it is a complex human expression with deep roots that need a subtler, more psychological understanding to reveal its nature. Sloth implies laziness, which is very different from sadness, and it is often used as a pejorative description by those with a disciplined work ethic about those who espouse a more relaxed approach to life. Apathy can be related to both sadness and laziness, because it's sometimes hard to understand whether you are simply being indolent or are crippled by deep doubts and loss of self-esteem. A more appropriate modern term for Sloth might be Depression, a word that is poorly understood in both medical and popular circles. And the much older Hellenistic text that linked Lust to deception also referred to the Sin of Apathy as 'that which causes increase and decrease': in other words, being at the mercy of your moods and feelings, sometimes to the point where you are unable to function in life. The idea of Sloth originated in a historical epoch when one was expected to pray regularly, do good works, and devote part if not all of one's life to the service of the Church. Personal feelings, especially those that reflected emotional needs, were not viewed as legitimate or acceptable. The modern Western idea of individuality was not part of the collective world-view in those days; individuals were identified by their place in the overall Great Chain of Being, as it was called, and did not have the right to individual emotions, beliefs, ideas, and dreams. In the Western world, we no longer espouse that world-view, although there are still plenty of spheres of life in which personal needs and desires are unacceptable in the face of collective expectations and assumptions. Apathy might sometimes reflect laziness; but it might also reflect deep unhappiness, dissatisfaction, and loss of faith and trust in life. But the ability to accept and move with the cycles of time in a spirit of grace, attentiveness, and loyalty to your inner dreams can transform Apathy into an immensely valuable quality: Serenity.

### Rest stops on the journey
Your powerful imagination impels you to move forward toward the exploration of new possibilities. You acknowledge mundane realities only if you can see a meaningful reason for them, or if they help to open the doors to inner realities. Otherwise you prefer to avoid entanglements with the responsibilities and limits of the physical and emotional worlds. You are an impatient person, and your vision rushes ahead far more rapidly than your instincts and feelings do. You are like someone who has moved house with great excitement and energy, and who only discovers later, after the disruption has passed, the sadness and grief of leaving a cherished old life behind. Give yourself time for your feelings and your bodily instincts and habits to catch up with your intuition. If you don't, you may become unaccountably depressed and apathetic just at the moment when you expect to feel optimistic and energetic about the future.

### The Icarus dilemma
You love looking forward to exciting new possibilities, and you don't like feeling confined by material responsibilities or emotional demands. But sometimes the joy and exhilaration you experience in pursuing future potentials may suddenly evaporate, and you can find yourself in a depression that you cannot explain. Apathy may erode your enthusiasm and sap your faith in yourself. Pay attention if you experience these moods, for you may be ignoring emotional and instinctual needs that make you feel threatened. You fear the bondage that can come from needing others too much, or from being needed too much by them, and you also fear the cage of mundane responsibilities that accompany any emotional commitment. But you are an embodied human and not a winged spiritual being; and if you want to avoid depression, you will need to honour that side of your humanity that needs roots in the earth and in the heart.

### Smouldering embers
Your Apathy is often a mask for resentment and bitter mistrust. You have powerful emotional needs and you feel things intensely. You are also a fiercely proud person; you don't forgive betrayal or humiliation, you don't forget insults and injuries, and you always remember kindness and loyalty. Disappointments in relationship can leave you feeling bitter and suspicious, and you may be inclined to punish other people, even those who haven't injured you, in order to restore your pride. Resentment can generate depressions from which you find it hard to emerge. Your emotional intensity makes you vulnerable to hurt, but it can bring an equal measure of joy and delight. Try to learn greater flexibility and insight into human behaviour, and work to develop a capacity to let go when life requires it. Not everyone loves in the same way. Others may never entirely fulfil your emotional needs, but it might not justify angrily turning love away. Your intuitive insights penetrate beyond your personal world and into the depths of the collective psyche. You are receptive to the emotional patterns of your family past and your cultural history. Find a creative vehicle for this gift, and explore the insights of psychology; both can offer you a means of expression and a bulwark against feelings of being overwhelmed. Episodes of Apathy in your life may seem to be unconnected with specific events. But even minor triggers can bring forgotten emotions to the surface and pitch you into depression. You may try to protect yourself from vulnerability with a cool, brittle veneer. But don't underestimate the power of your feelings, including those that belong to the past, or try to rationalise painful experiences in order to reduce their importance. You have a lower emotional pain threshold than many people, but you have a greater capacity for experiences of intense delight and joy. Avoid trying to reshape your emotional nature according to what others expect of you. And try not to strike back when you feel injured; spite and cruelty won't heal wounds or transform Apathy. The greater your insight and appreciation of the depth and intensity of your feelings, the more likely you are to find the serenity that grows from valuing yourself as who you are.

### Lost in space
You long to lose yourself in something greater than yourself, whether you experience it as the world of the imagination, the realm of the spirit, or the deeper dimensions of the unconscious psyche. You feel safest and most cherished when you cease to be conscious of your separateness, and your receptivity can reflect a special gift for creative expression and insight into the depths of human aspiration. Make sure you find the right creative vehicle, for otherwise you may constantly seek situations where you sacrifice your own identity for others or one special other, whom you then romanticise or spiritualise without realising that you are in love with a dream-image and not with a living individual. You can become apathetic and depressed when reality intrudes too harshly into your dream-world, and you may be at risk of self-destructive behaviour if you can't balance your vision with a sound appreciation of your worth as a separate individual. Your special sensitivity to the darker undercurrents of human behaviour may be rooted in your family past, and in a long history of emotional and sexual conflict and secrecy in the face of a hostile collective. Try to find creative vehicles for your insights, rather than nursing mistrust of any emotional encounter that might make you feel vulnerable and threatened. On the emotional level you are a mystic and a romantic, even if you see yourself as a sensible, rational individual. You are unusually sensitive to the emotional undercurrents of your family past and your cultural background. The first step in transforming Apathy into genuine serenity may lie in respecting the boundaries between you and others, and between you and the Other that you sense but can't articulate or rationalise. The next step may require finding the right creative vehicle through which you can express the deeper realities to which you are so sensitive. Apathy can make you feel it might be better to slip into the depths and disappear, rather than struggle with the burdens of mundane reality. Don't idealise sacrifice, or convince yourself that you are selfish if you give value to your own feelings. You have the strength to regularly emerge from the depths with treasures if you are clear about your individual self-worth.

### It's not fair
Apathy may plague you with a painful sense of being unfairly treated by life. You might believe that the source of your unhappiness lies in the cruelty and callousness of others, or the failings of society. If you identify with the role of the victim, you may feel you carry emotional scars that can never be healed. Perhaps you were deprived of emotional nourishment in early life; but your family members were themselves deprived or damaged in some way. Pay more attention to the resentment and bitterness you carry, and look more deeply at the inevitable conflict between the darker side of human nature and your own extremely high ideals. You could develop deep compassion for the unfair suffering in the world, but you may need to view with a more detached perspective the plight of flawed humans struggling, as you yourself do, to find light and meaning in a difficult world, and blundering badly because they, like you, feel life is so unfair. Early experiences of physical distress or illness, and disruptions in the order of your everyday existence, may have left you with deep mistrust of the world and distaste for responsibilities that might trap you in mundane reality. But you need to make peace with the physical world, however limiting you find it, and avoid letting bitterness affect your emotional and physical health. Apathy may manifest as feelings of isolation and depression, but you may also experience it as corrosive resentment. Don't identify with being the helpless victim of heartless forces you can't control; all humans are wounded by life in one way or another, even though you may believe your own hurts are worse. Self-pity and bitterness can't be healed by some magical power outside yourself; healing and wisdom need to come from within. You probably suffered unfair treatment in your early life, and you need to face this with compassion toward yourself. But compassion isn't the same as self-pity. Try to achieve a more detached perspective so that you can grasp the difference between actual injustices and your own impossibly high expectations. Identifying entirely with your wounds could turn you into exactly the kind of person you have felt injured by in the past; empathy for human blindness as well as human pain can give you true serenity.

### Storms in teacups
Your emotional weather forecast is usually extreme. You can swing from torrential rain and howling gales to brilliant sunshine and calm breezes, and you find it insulting to be called overly emotional when you feel things so intensely. You aren't falsifying your emotional responses. But you tend to indulge in them, and when your feelings have been aroused, objectivity can be uphill work. Perhaps, deep down, you don't really want to look at why you are usually on emotional high alert. Your inclination to excess may mask more disturbing feelings that could connect you with your ordinary humanity rather than to a grand opera scripted by and for the gods. Apathy can reveal itself as an uneasy sense of emptiness if you aren't able to fill your life with people and ideas to get intensely emotional about; but behind the emptiness may lie a deep need to ground yourself in ordinary life and enjoy the quiet, everyday pleasures of being an ordinary human. You have faith in your intuitive ability to look forward to future possibilities, and your optimism allows you to find meaning even in tough times. But emotional disappointment may require you to cope with sadness, depression, and loss by feeling them fully, rather than trying to escape painful emotional states through dreams of the happiness waiting just around the corner. Apathy may hint at inner conflicts that are not fully conscious. These conflicts are not in themselves negative, but they can be masked by your dramatic flair, which seeks to turn everything into a Shakespearean tragedy. You may need to face issues that are far more banal and human than you want them to be. Try to cultivate greater awareness of what you are really feeling, what has triggered your excessive responses, and what early experiences of being stifled or ignored might underlie your extreme reactions. And look carefully at the ways in which you may use drama as a tool for manipulating others' feelings. Your sense of the reality of the mythic realm is a gift that deserves a creative outlet broader than the world of your everyday life. You may need to balance your gift with more honesty about yourself, greater realism, and a deeper sense of ironic humour about yourself and about life.

### What goes round comes round
Apathy is a Sin that is profoundly related to the cycles of time, and to the idea that everything comes into being, arrives at fruition, and passes away when the time is right, making way for a new birth and a new cycle. Although the poet T. S. Eliot once wrote that April is 'the cruelest month', it is perhaps only with the coming of winter that humans experience most vividly the profound sadness of the dying year. Living in accord with such deep archetypal cycles demands that you recognise the ebb and flow your feelings, and the rightness of the times when you are most needy, most vulnerable, and least able to stand alone, as well as the times when you are at your strongest and most creative. You will never receive all of what you need at any time in life; but you may discover that you can experience enough love, respect, and encouragement, and support, from others as well as from yourself, to find serenity as you make your way through life. Apathy may disturb you deeply because you find it hard to value emotions, especially difficult ones, as much as you value ideas and future plans. You aren't averse to playing the role of the misunderstood free spirit whom others don't sufficiently appreciate, but you try to avoid Apathy with every resource at your disposal. This might not be a good idea, because the world of potentials in which you live will sometimes have to give way to the world of what is possible and what you can make of your talents in the mundane world. Apathy can be the path to your goals because its darkness can remind you of your emotional need for others and your unconscious reliance on safety and structure to provide you with a base from which to fly. Loneliness might not be the enemy you imagine it to be, and depression could be a road to deep insights that give you the substance and inner authority to make your visions into realities. If you experience sad emptiness where there could be fullness in your emotional world, you may need to turn to memory, especially the memory held in your emotions and your body, to discover what remains unfed. This can help you to accept what has been lost or cannot be changed, forgive those who have failed you, and seek with greater realism and compassion all that is rewarding in life, which might be far more than you imagine. Serenity can develop from a full recognition of your emotional needs, especially if you yourself have been denying those needs. Understanding your feelings without self-blame can be an effective antidote to the Apathy that drains colour, joy, and hope from life, and so can an acceptance of the flaws and limitations of every living creature with whom you engage. You will never find the perfect parent, whether you seek this through relationships, groups, material security, or political or spiritual convictions that promise safety and salvation. But you can find a good enough parent within yourself to nourish your inner world and share at least an important part of it with those closest to you.

## Conclusion
The Seven Sins have always been a powerful metaphor for the ways in which humans 'go wrong' in life. The Sins began as a story of the planetary journey of the soul into incarnation, but they were appropriated and given a particular moral slant by religious authorities, and have remained deep in human consciousness as impulses that, even in this apparently liberal twenty-first century, still have the power to make us feel bad about ourselves. There might be wisdom in the older perception, since the Seven Sins lie behind some of the most destructive emotions and actions of which humans are capable. There may be dimensions of each of these human expressions that are truly sinful, as the etymology of the word 'sin' suggests: they injure and demean life, and are thus in the nature of a debt that we owe but are reluctant to pay. Envy, if left unconscious and unchecked, breeds hatred and the urge to spoil and destroy. Gluttony, if left unconscious and unchecked, despoils our bodies, the lives of others, and even the planet itself. Wrath, if left unconscious and unchecked, generates acts of brutality, cruelty, and violence. Pride, if left unconscious and unchecked, leads to untrammelled displays of arrogance, power, and superiority that denigrate and oppress others. Lust, if left unconscious and unchecked, leads us into situations where we manipulate, betray, and justify our humiliation of others because we are driven by a compulsive need for self-gratification disguised as romantic desire. Deceit, if left unconscious and unchecked, turns us into liars, cheats, and schemers, full of cunning and willing to injure anyone who stands in our way. And Apathy, if left unconscious and unchecked, can make us expect other people to prop us up, emotionally and financially, because we feel we are owed something by life and have the right to demand that others give us what we need. These are not harmless human foibles. In an era when deeper questions about the meaning and nature of life have been given definitive answers by science, sociology, and politics, it might be important to remember that the word 'sin', albeit abused by so many religious doctrines, means 'injury' or 'transgression': an injury against the unfolding patterns of life itself. Yet the Seven Sins are also very much more. Each of them conceals an immensely creative human impulse. If we are prepared to understand their roots rather than simply indulging in an orgy of guilty self-loathing, they could help us to fulfil the highest potentials of which we are capable. Envy can become an appreciation of the worth and talent of others, and a spur to develop our own individual gifts. Gluttony can become an aspiration toward a deeper reality that gives a sense of meaning to our lives. Wrath can become courage and even heroism, as well as the will to take up life's hard challenges with integrity. Pride can become self-respect, allowing us to express all that is most individual and creative in us. Lust can reveal what we find most beautiful and joyful in life. Deceit can become honest pragmatism and a full embrace of the reality of the world in which we must live. And Apathy can yield a profound understanding of our deepest emotional needs, our most cherished longings, and our share in the cyclical nature of life.