# PSYCHE
## I. INTRODUCTION
Once upon a time, in a less scientific age than ours, astrology was a respected study, based on ancient and empirically compiled principles and used by the learned for greater insight not only into the future, but into the soul. With the coming of the Age of Enlightenment, and the increase in man's knowledge of the material universe, it seemed for a time that studies such as astrology, in company with other symbolic maps of the cosmos, had become anachronisms - pieces of superstitious nonsense which reflected a more ignorant and gullible era. But surprisingly, astrology, despite its detractors, has refused to go the way of the flat earth, the conjuring of demons, and the turning of lead into gold. It is alive and well, growing in popularity, and once again meriting the respect of intelligent minds - for it has been brought into the modern era through our increasing knowledge of psychology and of the inner nature of man. Subjected to many centuries of suppression and ridicule, astrology has outproven and outlasted its opponents, and eloquently demonstrates that it has something of great value to offer the modern individual seeking self-understanding.


In this horoscope analysis we have endeavoured, using the insights of astrology and psychology combined with the tools of advanced computer technology, to offer you an astrological portrait which is uniquely and individually focussed and which aims at providing greater self-knowledge. This is not fortune-telling astrology, but rather, psychological astrology, developed to as deep and sophisticated a level as is possible within the perimeters of computer interpretation. No computer can perform the task of an experienced human astrologer. But we think you will find this analysis a surprisingly profound and subtle interpretation of the complex dynamics at work within you.


Shakespeare once wrote that all the world is a stage, and all the men and women merely players. In a sense, your birth horoscope is a metaphor for the individual play, complete with stage set, cast of characters, and story, which lies at the core of your life journey. It might be useful for you to remember the metaphor of the theatre as you read through the various sections of your astrological portrait, because it can help you to understand the real meaning of fate as it is reflected by astrology. Fate does not lie in your being subjected to random preordained events. It lies in the cast of characters which represent the deepest needs, conflicts and aspirations which lie within you. No person can be other than himself or herself; and every life experience, whether tiny and transient or major and transformative, reflects in some way the character of the individual.

## II. YOUR PSYCHOLOGICAL TYPE
The rich array of individual attributes portrayed in your birth horoscope is set, as it is with everyone, against the backdrop of a certain temperament bias. We might call this bias your psychological "type", for it is a typical or characteristic way of responding to the situations life brings you. No one begins life whole or perfect, and all people have certain areas of strength - sophisticated and well-adapted inner characters - to help them deal with challenges, conflicts and problems. Likewise, all people have certain areas of weakness - inner characters who are underdeveloped, neglected and troublesome.


Your psychological type does not remain static and unchanging through the whole of your life. There is something within all of us - whether we call it the unconscious, the Self, or the soul - which strives toward balance and completeness, and which tries to integrate into our lives all those qualities or inner characters which have been neglected or undervalued. At certain important junctures in life, it is as though some central core, deeper and wiser than the conscious "I", draws us into conflicts which enable us to develop our weaker areas, so that we can become more complete as human beings. Thus you will find that, incorporated in the following paragraphs about your psychological type, are some suggestions about how you might facilitate this inner movement toward a more balanced perspective on life. Life does this for us, sooner or later. But sometimes it is more rewarding and less problematic if we cooperate with the process.

### Romantic vision and a rich imagination
You are one of life's true romantics, because your reality is the inner world of fantasy and imagination. The limitations of daily life can bore you, and you try at every available opportunity to inject into mundane situations a note of the mythic and the meaningful. However, your romanticism is constantly being challenged by another side of your personality: your fear of disruption to your material security. Although you dislike being tied to routines which seem inconsequential and stifling, life perpetually intrudes upon your dreams, forcing you into conflict between your vision and your practical limitations and needs. The great strength of your nature lies in your relationship to the creative power of the imagination, which enables you to peer into the future and envisage new possibilities which are not immediately apparent in the present. Because of this, you tend to see opportunities which others miss. You live in a world of potential, always looking toward the next project and the next enthusiasm. But there is a strong cynicism and worldliness beneath your romanticism which perpetually questions these hunches and dreams, making you feel restless and discontented whichever side of yourself you try to live. Another strength in your character is your ability to discern subtle connections between apparently disparate facts and circumstances, and to see a story or a broader pattern which others might ignore. Thus you often grasp the essence of a situation or a person instantaneously, through a kind of "sixth sense" which is usually extremely accurate yet which you cannot logically explain. But here too you are often at war with yourself, for that small cynical voice in you begins to denigrate your intuitive perceptions and can cause you to become indecisive. You often find yourself in a typical dilemma: whether to invest your energies in a creative project which requires trust and courage because it involves untried new ideas, or whether to stay in a safe job which guarantees material stability yet which bores and frustrates you. Although you are not usually foolish with money, it is not the sole object of your efforts, and you need challenges and inspiration in your work. Yet you cannot wholly forget about your material security either, and are faced with the challenge of finding a vocation which is both creatively rewarding and materially productive. And this may take you a long time and encompass many mistakes and false starts.

### The struggle against banality and mundane limits
If you attempt to live entirely in your imagination, you may run the risk of losing your connection with ordinary life - and with it, the capacity for contentment. Because of your resentment of boredom and routine, you may secretly yearn for an alternative life which is more glamourous, exciting or meaningful - without actually doing anything concrete about your craving for wider horizons. You also dislike having to select one thing to which you must apply yourself, preferring to live in a kind of provisional world - the "one day when I grow up..." syndrome, where all possibilities remain open to you. Yet if you pursue this approach to life exclusively, you will, with the passing of the years, feel increasingly unreal, as though you have somehow wasted your potentials and accomplished nothing solid in the end. Another manifestation of your conflict between the romantic, mystic realm and the hard world of facts and objects is your complex relationship with your own body, which often seems mysterious and frightening and which you may periodically neglect. You may resent having to fill your time with tasks like servicing the car and doing the monthly accounts, not to mention the dentist and the doctor; but your lack of attention to worldly and instinctual matters can result in constant irritations with mechanical objects breaking down, and also in problems with your health - not because you are intrinsically unhealthy, but because you tend to be sporadic in your care of your own body. You tend to swing between excessive and punishing diets and exercise routines to "master" the body, and times when you are not even aware that it exists. You possess a unique and complicated nature, and you need to stand in the middle between your two extremes so that you can become a better friend to your body and your material environment while still validating and giving expression to your powerful creative imagination. This effort at better balance can be rewarding and exciting. You possess a capacity to respond to nature and to the beauty of the physical world - if you will only stop running away from it. In very personal matters such as sexual expression, your shyness about your body can also have repercussions, and here too there might be a promise of greater fulfilment if you can face more honestly the alien realm of the instincts which you sometimes fear. Your perception of physical reality may be overtly negative, and it is possible that family attitudes in your early life have contributed to your undervaluing of it. Yet you possess the potential to have the best of both worlds, and can aim very high indeed if you can learn the art of being an ordinary mortal.

### Sensitivity to others combines with a creative imagination
Your imaginative abilities are supported by a deep instinctive insight into human behaviour and motives. You have a profound response to the world of symbols, myths and images, and may excel in one of the arts, such as music, painting, dance or theatre, where your ability to intuit character and mimic it in plastic forms may give you exceptional talents. Or you may combine your imagination and your sensitivity to the handling of others' problems, offering much sympathy and vision to loved ones or to those whom you might choose to counsel or help. Your grasp of the potentials of a situation combines with sensitivity and compassion for the needs and problems of others, and this lends a human touch to the strange and often uncanny abilities of your intuition. Your great gift lies in the sensing of human potential and the deeper and more meaningful lessons to be found in life's dilemmas; and you blend this with gentleness and a sense of timing that can allow you to midwife this potential in yourself and in others. Your imagination never divorces itself from the world of human feelings because your perceptiveness and concern will always keep you related to other people, so that all your creative hunches and inspirations ultimately work to enhance and enrich interpersonal relationships. Your deepest challenge in life, however, still remains the problem of earthing your vision and sense of human potential within the confines of material reality; and here your dependency upon human contact may make it even more difficult for you to cope with the restrictions and responsibilities that the world imposes upon you. Life sometimes requires a tough survival instinct and a capacity to cope alone if necessary. Your need to express your creative imagination through relationships with others may cause you to fear the cold self-sufficiency that situations sometimes demand of you. Occasionally too empathetic and idealistic for your own good, you have difficulty in drawing boundaries around yourself, and perpetually take on the burden of others' problems - not only because you are compassionate, but also because you do not know how to be firm about your own limits. And because your natural romanticism tends to express itself through faith in the potential of a relationship, you find it hard to face the imperfect reality of another person, preferring to live in a fantasy-image of what he or she could become rather than accepting the person who confronts you in actuality. You need to learn greater detachment and a more objective vision of life, and also could benefit from more overt stating of your ideas and needs to others - rather than hoping to be instantaneously and telepathically understood. Not everyone is as intuitive as you, and being able to be clear and direct about who you are and what you want can help you to a much greater sense of confidence in inhabiting that concrete world which you both fear and yet ultimately must embrace in order to feel real and secure in life.

## III. CHARACTER AND SHADOW
One of the most important insights gained by depth psychology has been the revelation that people are dual in nature, and contain a basic polarity of a conscious and an unconscious self. There is the individual you are familiar with - the "I" that thinks, feels and acts in accustomed ways which you identify as yourself. And there is another, hidden individual - the shadow-side - which contains the less acceptable and less developed aspects of your personality, and which fights for a valued place in your life at the same time that it disrupts the complacency of your self-image. The interplay between the conscious and unconscious sides of you is a constantly shifting dance, changing at different stages of your life and altering according to the pressures and challenges which you encounter. The tension between the primary characters in your inner drama, described in the following paragraphs, is the source of energy which provides your life with movement, purpose, conflict and growth. There are other characters inside you too - supporting players who blend and conflict with the main ones to make you the unique individual you are. Where these are strongly marked in your horoscope, we have included a description of them as well. The story thus portrayed, with its complicated interaction of light and shadow, represents what is really meant by individual destiny.

### The spirit of eternal youth dominates the stage
Whatever your actual age, there is something in you which will never grow old. Life is a perpetual unfinished novel for you, in which anything could lie around the next corner; and even if you carry considerable worldly responsibilities, you carry them lightly, always feeling as though somehow it isn't yet the real thing, but only a practise run - while the limitless potential within you has yet to be fully actualised. Thus you tend to live a kind of provisional life, never fully contented, never fully arrived. This quality of viewing life as a series of steps toward an unknown future tends to make you restless in the best and worst senses. You will never settle into stagnant complacency dreaming of the glories of your youth, for you carry your youth within you and will be receptive to change and new ideas all your life. But you also have a tendency to leave behind those projects and people with which you have become bored, and are therefore inclined to walk away before the fruits of your labours are realised; for the next pasture always seems greener. As the old proverb says, it is better to travel than to arrive - at least, better in your eyes.

### A taste for excess
You loathe boundaries of any kind, for you are a wanderer who demands a limitless horizon. The moment your material circumstances close off that distant view of the road going on forever, you are liable to slip away, in spirit if not in body, for you are not very good at deep commitment and are only capable of it if your partner or work situation gives you plenty of freedom to go away and come back again when you please. There is a rather imperious quality to this demand for freedom; for on some deep level you believe you are entitled to it regardless of the cost to anybody else. Yet your personality is not imperious in manner, and you are a generous, warm-hearted and supportive friend. It is just that you hate being tied down, for your boundless imagination can only function with an open door behind and in front of you. For the same reason you rarely burn bridges in your personal relationships after they have ended, and have a propensity to collect "exes" - no doubt to the profound annoyance of whomever shares your present life. You also dislike mundane routines, and prefer that someone else does the cleaning up after you; and this springs from your secret belief that you are a gifted and creative soul with a unique vision, who should not have to be bothered with such trivia. You like to dwell on what you consider the meaningful and important things in life. You are opportunistic enough, in the nicest possible way, to make sure that the right people turn up in your life at the right times to provide you with stepping-stones to wherever it is you are going. It is very likely that you will get away with such shameless opportunism, and be loved and admired for your vision and your good luck. You are one of those people whom it is impossible to dislike for long, because you have so much innate charm, warmth and vitality; yet you can occasionally be dreadfully egotistical, and are often quite oblivious to the feelings of others. However, every creative soul must possess a touch of megalomania in order to create at all; for how else could you believe in yourself enough to try?

### Excessive romanticism can become childish naivete
You are sometimes too romantic for your own good, for you have an idealised vision of love which no mortal could possibly fulfil after the honeymoon has passed. It is not that you expect more than you are prepared to give, for you are a kind, generous and affectionate person, and you adore the trappings of romance - the flowers, the romantic holidays, the candlelit dinners and the soft words of love. And you are ready and willing to offer these trappings to a partner. But on the morning that your loved one wakes up in a bad mood and forgets to be romantic, you begin to wonder whether this is really the One; and your fantasies begin to wander away into a dream where the Real Thing awaits you in the misty future. Likewise, you do not allow sufficient space for your own bad moods and unromantic days, and can be as disillusioned at your own loss of the gossamer spirit of romance as you are at a partner's. You want life to be happy, wonderful, and full of good things to see, touch, smell, taste and buy - all the time. You are rather self-indulgent, although you are probably lucky enough to get away with it; and you hold a deep conviction that you are entitled to happiness and that, if you don't possess it, then you are with the wrong person. You inject your romantic spirit into everything you do, and in this way you are extremely creative, with a lively aesthetic sense and a well- developed capacity for fun and laughter. But you need to learn to allow life to be dreary sometimes, because if you do not, then you run the risk of perpetually moving from one lover to another, still seeking Mr or Ms Right, long after the shops have shut.

### The vision of life as an endless set of possibilities
Thus your considerable imaginative and intellectual gifts combine with a restless, volatile personality to produce one of life's eternally wandering spirits. This should not be taken too literally, for you need some material stability in your life as much as anyone does, and would particularly benefit from owning your own home - a place where you can retreat in privacy and express your own taste and style. But you are a wanderer in the inner sense, for you digest experiences and then move on to seek new ones, looking and looking for something - and it is some thing, not some one as you might imagine - which heralds the call of destiny, the sign from above, the recognition that you have at last arrived. The probability is that you will never arrive, for your unique gift and your unique problem are the same: You prefer the journey. Although you have a hard time with self-discipline, commitment, responsibility and authority, you will never find life boring, for you see lessons and opportunities for growth and secret signs everywhere; and the happy thing about such perceptions is that, if you can learn the art of sticking with something long enough to finish it, you can produce relevant and exciting creative products which vindicate your deep sense of your own special destiny.

### A hidden side that favours traditional values
In contrast to your bright, restless and rebellious conscious personality, there is another protagonist in your inner psychic drama. This hidden figure contains all those qualities which you have excluded from your values and your outer behaviour in order to retain the intellectual, emotional and physical freedom you crave. The shadow-side of your personality is considerably more conventional, conservative and traditional than you might like to admit; and if you consider honestly the sometimes disproportionately negative reactions that you display when confronted with such qualities in other people and in social institutions, you may glimpse within yourself a secret sympathy with these more old-fashioned values. The problem is that you strive to be a rebel, a forward-thinking and unique individualist; and you would have to make peace with a slightly less glossy, glamourous and stereotyped self-image if you are going to integrate your shadow. Yet upon this integration depends your capacity to produce anything really worthwhile with your vision and your talents; and, even more importantly, you need this hidden side of yourself to feel real.

### The need for accepting mortal limits
Thus your eternally youthful spirit, with its vivacity, restlessness and originality, is balanced by an equally important but hidden side of you which is slower, earthier, less articulate, and considerably more traditional and ordinary. You fear displaying your shadow-side to others partly because its values are so different from yours; and partly because you are frightened of being rejected and thought boring and ordinary. Because of your unease in the face of real material challenges, you fly up into the realm of potentials, living in a kind of perennial "One day when I grow up..." dream-world. But much of this flight masks your fear of failure and incompetence in the eyes of the world. You are a gifted and far-seeing individual who can truly achieve something extraordinary. But you will need to accept some of the rules and limits of ordinary life, including your own needs; for life will not, in the end, exempt you. No matter how talented you are, and how special, you are subject to the same conflicts, fears and needs - particularly of security and belonging - as your fellows. When you are able to truly accept your own limits, you are likely to find much greater inner serenity.

### Powerful emotional needs lie hidden in the shadow
There is second dimension to the darker side of your usually independent and restless emotional nature. This dimension of your personality comes into play whenever you become deeply and intimately involved with another person; and it contains all those qualities which you have excluded from your conscious values and behaviour so that you can preserve your feeling of freedom. Probably, because you tend to repress your own emotional needs, you meet them via your lovers and partners, who appear to you possessive, dependent, extremely sensitive to the least sign of rejection and indifference, and prone to using emotional blackmail to retain your constant attention. But these attributes in fact belong to your own shadow. You fear the depth and intensity of your feelings, because admission of them might leave you vulnerable to hurt and humiliation, and too much dependency might trap you so that your imagination and your high-flying spirit cannot breathe. Yet if you do not integrate this shadow, you will never be able to sustain the loving relationship you crave; and the easy replacements may not always be available to you as time goes by.

### The problem of jealousy and possessiveness
Although you might hate to admit it, or even acknowledge it, you are actually an extremely jealous and possessive person. Your emotional needs are far deeper and more intense than you habitually show; and where there is such powerful attachment, there will inevitably also be possessiveness. Generally it is you who complain about a partner's jealousy, and you are prone to unconsciously setting up triangles and forcing two people into competition with each other over you, and then becoming resentful when either of them becomes angry about it. No one can own another person, you declare; and you dislike having to account for your time or having your actions curtailed by obligations to another. Yet secretly you try to possess those close to you, for you want them to be totally yours and available constantly according to your own needs. For this reason you also do not close the door on past relationships, claiming that there is no reason why you should be required to give up a friendship just because your present partner is jealous; but secretly enjoying the fantasy that you could still have that other too if you wanted him or her. What this amounts to, on the most profound level, is that you need to have power over your loved ones, because you fear the powerlessness that comes from your own intense feelings. If a loved one were to behave with the same flirtatious inconstancy that you yourself display, or asked for the absolute freedom you demand, you are capable of quite violent emotional eruptions. You tend to protect yourself from your own depths by simply not caring all that much. After all, everything is provisional anyway. But perhaps some time you should put it to the test. Your shadow holds the key to your own deep and abiding capacity for love; and you need to be able to be more honest in expressing it. It is probable that during your early life you were deeply attached to your mother, and that she inadvertently used your devotion to further her own need for emotional comfort. You are therefore frightened of having your love of another used as a means of power, and thus turn around and unconsciously do the very same thing to the people who love you. But perhaps it is time to leave your mother behind, and to live more freely what you truly are: a dynamic and creative spirit who also possesses powerful emotional and sensual desires and a deep need for enduring and intimate relationship with a special person in your life.

### The importance of accepting the needs of the heart
Thus your hidden shadow-side tends to invade the realm of your personal relationships, and focuses itself around the issues of possessiveness, need, obligation and fear of loneliness. If you find that you are the one to leave relationships because you become trapped and stifled, or are perennially complaining to a long-term partner that you want more space and freedom, try to look at what you yourself might be unconsciously doing to generate the problem. You have a rich and complex personality which combines an unusual degree of intellectual and imaginative scope with an intense and passionate emotional nature; and since both belong to you, both deserve to be expressed and lived. Because you fear dependency so much, you tend to project your own shadow- side onto your partners and lovers and even children and work colleagues; and when you imagine that any of these people are asking for too much from you, you tend to react with a coolness and evasiveness that are extremely hurtful. Worse, such a reaction tends to draw out of others that insecure possessiveness that you profess to despise; for if you constantly keep a person unsure of your love and support, he or she will almost always become frightened, uncertain and demanding. Thus you force others to act out what you cannot face in yourself. Your needy shadow is not negative. It makes you human, and gives you a heart. If you were nothing but an eternal youth, full of bright ideals and wanderlust, you would be a callous and unfeeling creature; but fortunately, such creatures exist only in myth. There is no doubt of the power of your sparkling and creative spirit. But you are also made of flesh and blood, and need to let others see it occasionally. Not everyone is like your mother, and not everyone you love will use the knowledge against you to extract promises you cannot keep. No one can own your soul but you - a concept which you profess to understand, but which you may still need to really grasp by allowing someone close enough to try.

### Another pair of important characters
The characters described so far represent in their fundamental antagonism the main theme of your inner story. Besides these figures, there is another pair of conflicting figures indicated in your birth chart which are likely to be recognisable in your life. These figures are briefly described in the following paragraphs.

### A love of the unseen world
Although you appear to live on the earth like other people, your mind dwells in loftier, more ethereal realms. You are a sensitive and idealistic person who is not wholly comfortable within the limits and boundaries of material life; for, like Plato, you crave the Good, the True and the Beautiful - and if you are unable to find glimpses of your dream amidst the mundane circumstances in which you find yourself, through love or creative endeavours or study, you are capable of becoming depressed or even ill. There must be Something More, you tell yourself, because you are quite unable to live with and accept the harsher aspects of reality. It is as though you are missing some layer of skin that other people seem to have; and consequently, life bruises you easily. Because you believe so wholeheartedly in a transcendent reality, you usually manage to get intimations of it, however brief, that renew your faith sufficiently for you to cope. This elusive, ethereal and other-worldly quality is the source of many of your apparently unpredictable and unstable experiences. It is appropriate for you to seek a lifestyle and a vocation which can enhance and validate, rather than crush, your idealism and faith. All the products of the imagination are meaningful to you, more so than the domain of physical objects which matter so much to others. Spiritual values and ideals are a necessity to you, but you will need the courage to challenge more conventional religious formulae and to trust your inner experiences. It is not a moral code you seek, or a dogmatic interpretation of the divine; but rather, a direct experience of a transpersonal reality which can offer you hope, comfort, and the validation of your dream of beauty, goodness and truth in life. Otherwise life will hurt you, for without such values to provide your base you are too thin-skinned and lack the toughness to digest some of life's more brutal offerings. Then, disillusioned and lost, you run the risk of turning other people - particularly partners - into semi-divine protectors and carriers of that spiritual reassurance you crave; and others will, when placed in such an impossible situation, inevitably let you down - for what you seek is inside you. Life will eventually challenge you on the issue of your adaptation to the material world, for higher insight is not worth very much if it cannot be lived in the context of the actual world.

### A capacity to appreciate material pleasures
In contrast to this figure, there is another opposing character in your inner drama; and there is considerable conflict within you between these very different ways of viewing and experiencing life. It is hard to decide from your birth horoscope which of both figures will dominate the other. Probably you have lived out first one and then the other side of this conflict at various times; but the real value of such a creative tension between inner characters lies in the potential of a broad and flexible life which gives value and expression to both of them. You have made peace with the world's requirements, and intend to enjoy to the full whatever life makes available to you. Reality for you consists of what you can see, touch, smell, taste, hear, and put in the bank; and although you love physical beauty wherever you find it - in a person, a work of art, or in nature - you do not become distressed by visions of unattainable perfection or aspirations of transcendance. It is the fulfillment of your desires in the here and now that interests you, not some other incarnation or astral experience. Because of your deeply sensual appreciation of life, you are more than likely to draw delight from the fruits of whatever you accomplish - the grass in the next pasture does not seem any better than what grows underfoot. Thus satisfaction of the senses and material security have a high priority in your life. If you are able to achieve them - which is probable because you are inventive as well as practical - then you have the unusual capacity for a rich and contented life. If you do not achieve them, however, or if you are frustrated in some particular obsession, then you can become very difficult indeed, for your sense of self-worth is rooted in your body and in your capacity to possess what you desire. You do not just idly want something or someone, you must have it, him or her. You are very tenacious, and sometimes extremely stubborn and inflexible; and you are capable of relentlessly repeating your efforts even when it has been made clear to you, by life or by another person, that you really ought to try elsewhere. Because you are proud and sometimes a little too touchy about your vanity, a rebuff or a failure which might find acceptance in someone else can invoke some quite nasty and destructive feelings in you. You have a long memory for grievances and hurts. But to compensate for this, you also have a long memory for favours and kindnesses, and can be extremely loyal and generous to those whom you trust. You are not an easy character, despite your surface charm; but you are a deep, complicated and vital one, and your personal magnetism makes you stand out over blander, more colourless souls. Life will one day challenge you about your rather lopsided tendency to define reality by what you can hold in your hands, for the question of the meaning and purpose of your life will eventually loom larger in your life. But by the time these issues become relevant, you will probably have achieved, at least on a material level, much of what you want.

## IV. THE FAMILY BACKGROUND
Family myths and psychological inheritance
Although you are an individual, you have emerged from a family background. A family is like a living organism, and it includes certain hereditary characteristics which have passed down through the generations. It also contains a particular set of psychological dynamics, an emotional climate which provides the first soil in which your nascent individuality took root in childhood. Thus you contain certain inner patterns, myths and attitudes toward life which you have acquired from the psychological soil of your family background. In other words, to return to our metaphor of the theatre, the characters in your inner drama are unique; but they carry a family inheritance. Astrology cannot tell us about physical heredity. But it can tell us a great deal about psychological heredity, which runs through families in the same way that red hair or blue eyes do. Psychological inheritance of deeply rooted attitudes often takes place on hidden, unconscious levels of which individual family members are unaware. Family myths move down the generations as surely as a distinctive facial structure does. An example of a family myth might be: "All the men in this family have been self- made and successful." Or, "All the women in this family have been disappointed by their men." Myths such as these do not need to be spoken, or even recognised, for they pass from one generation to the next via the unconscious, and they are communicated in a multitude of subtle, nonverbal ways. Thus the male child born into the family of "successful men" will inherit a particular set of expectations to which he will respond according to his own nature and his own inner characters. And the female child born into the family of "disappointed women" will inherit certain attitudes about relationships which will affect her later in life if she remains unaware of this inner script. Because your family background is an integral part of your life story, it is reflected in your birth horoscope. Astrology can offer considerable helpful insight into this realm of life, for according to how conscious you are of the interplay between your own nature and your family inheritance, you will have more or less freedom of choice in life. Your parents themselves are also reflected in your horoscope, although they appear not as real three-dimensional people, but rather as images who embody a particular theme or set of attitudes. These parental images reflect how mother and father appear to you personally, how they operate as patterns within your own psyche, and how they support or conflict with the unfoldment of your own inner drama. The power of the family background should never be underestimated, for it is not the past. It is a living present within each of us. As the poet Rainer Maria Rilke once wrote: "Never believe fate is more than the condensation of childhood."

### The image of the father in a man's chart
Father is not only a real person. He is also the symbol of an inner pattern or perspective through which you relate to life. The image of your father portrayed in your birth horoscope therefore describes three things. Firstly, it is a subjective picture of the qualities you experienced as most dominant in your relationship with your father - or whoever played the role of father in your early life. Secondly, it is a symbol of what the masculine represents to you, for your father was the first man in your life and is therefore a powerful unconscious influence on how you express your own masculinity and how you relate to other men. Thirdly, it is a picture of your own inner father-qualities: how you order and structure your life, how you envisage and pursue your goals, how you actualise your potentials in the world, how you express and direct your will, and how you formulate your ethical codes and ideals; and, lastly, how you father your own children.

### An assertive and self-willed figure
The subjective image of your father portrayed in your birth horoscope is a forceful one - an aggressive personality, full of competitive and wilful spirit, and resentful at having to compromise with anyone else's needs and wishes. However, this powerful portrait may describe the emotional life of your father rather than his outer behaviour, and it is possible that he sometimes maintained, on the surface, a relatively agreeable personality. He may even have seemed to you on occasion weak and ineffectual rather than strong, angry and determined. But you should look more closely at him, for your father had a dilemma about the expression of anger and overt aggression. Whether he acted his problem out through violence or appeared passive and suppressed his real feelings, your experience of him is of a powerful and rather frightening figure.

### The problem of aggression
It is particularly important to understand your father's dilemma about aggression because it is also your dilemma. You may have feared his anger in childhood, whether it was expressed or not; and in adult life you may fear your own aggressive urges, not realising what positive potentials they can offer. Confrontation with others is difficult for you; for at the root of your fear of other's anger lies your fear of the potent and threatening image of your father. Thus you have inherited a great challenge from your father - the creative use of a naturally aggressive spirit, without which you cannot actualise your potentials to the fullest extent. Your father may have been unable to handle his own force and power, and was physically or emotionally violent. If so, this poses you with an additional challenge - the problem of learning to understand and accept the roots of such violence, and recognising that it arises from an inner conflict rather than from aggression alone. You may not see clearly enough the tensions existing in your parents' relationship, or perhaps have identified too much with being your father's victim - thereby becoming a little too peaceable and eager to please, and repressing your own natural potency. Expression of violence does not reflect a healthy aggression, but rather the same problem as impotence and passivity: a repudiation of the passions, which then reach boiling point within. Thus, whichever extreme of the pattern your father expressed, you have inherited his vitality, his competitiveness, his wilfulness and his idealistic spirit. You possess a determined, strong-willed and courageous facet to your personality, and this is a valuable trait - if you could only realise it. You will need to look carefully at your attitude toward your aggressive impulses, so that you can express your power in harmony with your need for relationship. There is still another image portrayed by your birth horoscope, which in certain ways conflicts with your dominant experience of your father.

### A lack of support and encouragement
Although you may not be fully aware of it, you did not have a real relationship with your father at all. Even if he was physically present in your childhood, it is the inner experience that your horoscope portrays, and it is on the inner level that you have been "unfathered". Probably your father was unable, either through physical absence or because of a weak or withdrawn personality, to offer much in the way of genuine support and encouragement to you, although he may, on the surface, have been responsible and conscientious as a provider.

### Need of validation through others
Because of the sense of emptiness or lack which has secretly permeated your early relationship with your father, there is a kind of lost quality about you yourself - although you might not have understood the roots of it. No matter how much you achieve in life, you are a perpetual observer, watching it all unfold on a cinema screen, without a sense of direct involvement in your own life. There are positive aspects of this experience of your father which have developed in you - you have a quality of detachment and self-containment which is of great value. But you need considerable approval and encouragement from others, because you were not "real" to your father in childhood and are therefore not always "real" to yourself now. You need to learn that you are of value whether others approve of you or not. Although there is a melancholy quality within you because of this absence in early life, there is also something strong and enduring which has grown in you in compensation; and the more attention you pay to your strengths, the less isolated you will feel in your quest for meaning in your life.

### The image of the mother in a man's chart
Mother, like father, is not only a person. She is the symbol of an essential principle in life, and of an inner dynamic or perspective through which we relate to life. The image of the mother portrayed in your birth horoscope therefore describes three things. Firstly, it is a subjective description of the qualities most dominant in your relationship with your mother. Many of these will be known to you, but some might be surprising, because they reflect not only her outer behaviour, but her inner life - that side of her which was unexpressed and therefore of great power in terms of its effects on you. Secondly, the mother-image in your horoscope is a portrait of what the feminine represents to you - how you experience women, and how you relate to the emotional and instinctual dimensions of your own personality. And thirdly, it is a picture of your own "maternal" qualities - for men possess mothering capacities too - your ability to nurture and care for yourself and others, your sense of safety and trust in life's essential kindness, and your ability to flow with time and circumstances and to know instinctively when to wait and accept with wisdom the situations which life brings.

### The craving for adoration
The subjective image of your mother portrayed in your birth horoscope is a restless and disturbing one. Even if she chose to put her considerable energies into the roles of wife and mother, her image within you embodies an adventurous and theatrical quality - a kind of childlike enthusiasm and craving for romance and attention which no doubt conflicted with her family responsibilities. In terms of your own inheritance of this romantic, restless spirit, much depends upon whether your mother was able to live out any of it herself in a colourful career, or whether she was submerged in a conventional structure which frustrated her inner craving for adventure and excitement. The positive qualities which this mother-image offers are those of a rich imagination and a vision of future potentials which can make life perpetually better and more rewarding. But if your mother could not live the eternal girl in herself and allowed her romantic dreams to be crushed, then you may be driven with a deep inner compulsion to live out the high drama she denied herself, without understanding fully why. Your mother probably tried to get the devotion and excitement she needed so badly through manipulative ploys, such as becoming ill at timely moments in order to ensure the absolute attention of her loved ones. And you may be left with a deep fear of commitment and of the trap of domestic responsibility because of your experience of the unhappiness of an adventurous soul that has been imprisoned.

### A trapped romantic spirit turns to martyrdom
You may need to learn to distinguish between your mother's apparently conventional outer behaviour, and the wild and rather theatrical soul beneath; for the same roving spirit and craving for bigger and better things lies within you too. Creatively handled, this inheritance provides you with great imagination and a liveliness of outlook, as well as a capacity for finding life endlessly interesting and joyful. But if you perceive your mother merely as a manipulative martyr, you may be driven to act out her unlived and unconscious side - the eternal adolescent who runs from life into grandiose dreams and cannot ultimately achieve anything solid. Nor will the opposite help - trying to be more mature and responsible than your mother, and thus denying the eternal child in yourself. This spirit which you have inherited from your mother is an innately joyous one, full of vitality and colour; but you will first need to perceive the inner woman beneath whatever outward manner she adopted before you can begin to give your own truly individual expression to her qualities within yourself.

## V. RELATIONSHIP PATTERNS
Relationships are among the most mysterious, rewarding and frustrating of all human experiences. Both astrology and psychology teach us that nothing that occurs within a relationship is chance - neither its beginning, nor its fluctuations and conflicts, nor its ending. But astrology cannot say whether you are "fated" to have a good or a bad marriage, or whether you ought to be with a Cancer or a Sagittarius. Your birth horoscope describes what you are like inside, and therefore what kind of patterns, needs and compulsions you are likely to bring into your relationships with others. You cannot become somebody different, or send in your birth horoscope and request a new set of character. But you can be more or less conscious; and you always have the freedom to look at your own issues, to deal with needs which are your responsibility and not your partner's, and to respond to both joy and pain in creative ways. The following paragraphs describe your attitudes, needs, and typical patterns in close relationships. This description is written about you in terms of your dealings with the woman in your life. However, if you are involved in a close relationship with someone of your own sex, you will find that the same attitudes, needs and patterns still apply. Whatever your sexual tastes, you are yourself - and it is your inner nature which ultimately dictates the course of your love-life. Themes connected to relationship issues have already been mentioned in the previous chapters, where the basic archtypal figures dominating in your birth chart were described. Therefore some of the following description will repeat and broaden parts of what has been said already. Some might also contradict, and indicate an inner contradiction inherent in your attitude towards relationships.

### The art of distinguishing women from mother
Your tendency to fall in love with an ideal fantasy rather than a real woman causes you to be perennially dissatisfied in your relationships - even if you have managed to hold together a conventional marriage for many years. You tend to be rather fascinating to women because of your elusiveness and vision, and you may frequently find yourself the unwilling object of others' pursuit. But you are deeply frightened of your emotional needs, fearing the dependency and vulnerability which deep commitment might unleash; and thus you struggle against your capacity for intense love, projecting onto your partner what is in fact your own tendency to be possessive and demanding. Try to stop disowning your own feelings; for the kind of women you are drawn to are usually those with large hearts and deep understanding, and you cannot eternally play games with such a woman by pretending to be more callous than you in fact are. Not all woman are like your mother, and not all will attempt to bind and manipulate you and devour your soul if you express simple human needs.

### The need for emotional honesty
You are capable of driving almost any woman into insecure and possessive behaviour if you withhold affection at the critical moment, or if you play one woman against another. This is not a reflection of women's incurable voraciousness, but rather, a reflection of your own internal conflict. If you truly wish to be free of commitment, then try to be honest enough to live by that decision, and stop stringing women along. If you want marriage, or a loyal and monogamous relationship, then try to be brave enough to face your own problems rather than trying to have your cake and eat it too; for as Confucius said, he who tries to have cake and eat it too winds up with egg on face.

### The problem of accommodating the needs of others
You have great difficulty in compromising in personal relationships. Your finest offering to another is genuine friendship, and you can be a loyal, generous and understanding companion just so long as your partner does not express demands or needs of his or her own that might conflict with your own wishes. Thus you are at heart a lover rather than a husband or wife in the deepest sense, for you live by a kind of emotional double standard. You feel entitled to the warmth, love and constancy of your partner when you need these things. Yet you resent being asked to provide the same responses when your partner desires it. You understand passion, but not compromise and adjustment. Your tolerance and friendship express themselves only when you do not feel trapped or pressured in any way. Thus, if you happen to have married at a young age, you will have no doubt run into difficulties, largely because of your resistance to a two-way give-and-take arrangement. You tend to feel misunderstood a lot of the time, because you know you are capable of offering a great deal to others, but remain quite unconscious of how you secretly demand that relationships be run according to your terms alone. In fact you may be so unconscious of this side of yourself that you have projected it, attracting a partner who acts it out for you in retaliation against your own unyielding nature. There are many creative aspects to your restless independence, and among these is your deep respect for individual freedom and your genuine tolerance of other people's eccentricities. You never judge anybody, and nothing shocks you. Thus you are a fine and understanding friend. It is in the more intimate side of relationships that your rigidity displays itself. You should think twice about making formal contracts until you have faced your own dilemma in this sphere of life, for you need other people and must learn sooner or later that others have the same desires, needs and rights that you do.

### A tendency to excess
Your motto in love is that more is better. This means more romance, more candlelight, more courtly declarations of affection, and, perhaps, more partners. You may justify your profligacy by means of an ideology which says that people should not possess each other, or a spiritual vision which says that you need the right soul-mate, or an aesthetic ideal which tells you that your present companion is not quite perfect. Or you may simply be honest about your love of variety. But you are going to have certain difficulties if you make the decision to commit yourself to one woman for a lifetime. It is not that you cannot love; for, if anything, you love to excess, and throw your whole self into it. But you crave adventure too, and you are deeply idealistic about love; and time and familiarity are the enemies of such a romantic spirit. No relationship, however passionate, will automatically remain mysterious and challenging if you do not nurture its unpredictability by frequent holidays and travel with your woman, frequent absences from the domestic front with its endless responsibilities, and frequent admonitions to yourself not to take your partner for granted. Otherwise you might be faithful from a sense of honour and idealism, but not from real inclination. It would be better to be honest about your own restlessness, for there are many levels on which your adventurous spirit can be lived out, and some of them can include a stable relationship and do not necessitate deceit and betrayal. But it would be better not to repress this side of yourself, for then you are really asking for trouble. You are more prone than many people to falling in love at first sight, at the wrong time, in the wrong place, and with someone other than the person with whom you came in the door.

### Passion arises from challenge
You may be occasionally prone, as everyone is, to idealised fantasies of love; but you are not romantic enough to ignore your need for challenge, conflict and the occasional good fiery quarrel in your close relationships. Something in you is sexually sparked only when you meet a woman who can stand up to you and who will not allow you to dominate her; for although you respond to beauty and harmony, you respond to passion more, and one of the primary ingredients of passion is combat. Thus you are better off accommodating this need in your life, for if you try to keep love on too even, placid and pleasant a course for too long, you may find that the love remains but the desire disappears, only to reappear somewhere else. You need to express honestly and openly your fondness for trying to dominate your woman, for you are rather self-centred in matters of love and do not enjoy compromise; but you also need to accept the fact that if you have the right partner, she will fight back. Perhaps you should have one of those relationships in which frequent shouting, smashing of plates and slamming of doors can be heard by the amused neighbours. You might find that it instantly restores interest and attraction if they have begun to wane through time and familiarity.

## VI. PATHS TOWARD INTEGRATION
As you have seen from the preceding pages, your birth horoscope offers a detailed and in-depth portrait of many aspects of your life. It is also possible to step further back from the horoscope, and to use the faculties of a telescope rather than a microscope - so that an overview of the play comes into focus. The following provide also some suggestions of ways in which conscious effort might make it possible for you to achieve greater harmony between the different components within yourself, and to strengthen that centre of the personality which psychology calls the ego, the "I". Free will may not include the possibility of becoming somebody else. But it might include the ability to stand firmly at the centre of your horoscope and feel related to the different aspects of your psyche, rather than wandering about blindly, feeling impotent and victimised by conflicting cross- currents and impulses from within yourself and from the world outside. Two people may have certain astrological configurations which are similar, but one might be buffeted by his or her inner demons like a rudderless small boat tossed on a difficult sea; while the other individual remains somehow solid and real as a person and can therefore navigate the boat intelligently through the ocean's changing currents.

### Expressing an original voice
You will never find fulfillment in life by denying the importance of learning and communication, or by hiding your own creative ideas in an effort to blend unobtrusively with the collective. You have an original voice that needs to be heard, and your deepest sense of meaning will come from making the effort to express that voice - through media such as writing, performing or teaching, and through studying a wide range of subjects and then offering to others the fruits of your increasing fund of knowledge and insight. Communication is the sphere of life where you will come most alive, and whatever difficulties you may meet - inside yourself in the form of shyness or inhibition, or outside in the form of people who disagree with your viewpoints - it is worth putting time and energy into perfecting your communicative skills and your power of expression and articulation so that you can share in the development and exchange of ideas which is your real path in life. Your conviction that you have a unique message to offer others, and a unique destiny to live, can support your efforts to develop yourself in the sphere of communication. You need to be different, important and noticed; and this drive toward recognition provides the ambition and energy which can push you into developing skills through which your ideas can be offered to others.

### The dilemma of the outsider
There is one area of your life where any effort to face your fears and overcome them will always result in increased strength and self-respect - even if you are not successful every time. However sociable and socially concerned you may appear - or believe yourself to be - nevertheless you carry inside you a strong feeling of being an outsider - a person who does not belong to the group and who can expect only rejection from it. Although you may care deeply about particular individuals in your life, it is the larger human family which seems somehow alien and unwelcoming - as though you were some kind of changeling who secretly belongs to a different species and who will be quickly found out if you try too hard to get accepted. And because you are proud, you would rather withdraw and reject them first, before they have a chance to reject you. Yet you deeply need the feeling of belonging, of being one of many, and of sharing universal feelings, fears and aspirations. You would greatly benefit from taking up the challenge of the collective, and exposing yourself to your fears by making the effort to relate to people in their language. It is the only way you will discover that humanity is made up of individuals just like you, each of whom feels insecure about something at some time. There is no such thing as a norm, which you would find out if you took the risk of expressing your need of some kind of like-minded group around you. A handful of close friends is not the same thing. It is from the collective, which you both need and fear, that your real sense of strength and support will come. Thus one of your great fears - of being seen as inarticulate, boring and unintelligent - can become the indestructible base on which to build your chosen medium of expression, for the thing you fear is also the path toward your true fulfillment in life. You cannot become what you potentially are without confronting that domain where you feel most inadequate, and every effort you make to share and express your thoughts to others, however awkward, embarrassed or unsuccessful you might feel on occasion, will contribute to your growing strength and self-confidence. You will never discover that what you have to say is worth hearing unless you say it.